

NS: Act 1 Scene 1
SD: Enter +RODORIGO, and +IAGO.
+RODORIGO
NEuer tell me, I take it much vnkindly
That thou (Iago) who hast had my purse,
As if ye strings were thine, should'st know of this.
+IAGO
But you'l not heare me.
If euer I did dream / Of such a matter,
abhorre me.
+RODORIGO
Thou told'st me, / Thou did'st hold him in thy hate.
+IAGO
Despise me / If I do not. Three Great-ones of the Cittie,
(In personall suite to make me his Lieutenant)
Off-capt to him: and by the faith of man
I know my price, I am worth no worsse a place.
But he (as louing his owne pride, and purposes)
Euades them, with a bumbast Circumstance,
Horribly stufft with Epithites of warre,
Non-suites my Mediators. For certes, saies he,
I haue already chose my Officer.
And what was he?
For-sooth, a great Arithmatician,
One Michaell Cassio, a Florentine,
(A Fellow almost damn'd in a faire Wife)
That neuer set a Squadron in the Field,
Nor the deuision of a Battaile knowes
More then a Spinster. Vnlesse the Bookish Theoricke:
Wherein the Tongued Consuls can propose
As Masterly as he. Meere pratle (without practise)
Is all his Souldiership. But he (Sir) had th'election;
And I (of whom his eies had seene the proofe
At Rhodes, at Ciprus, and on others grounds
Christen'd, and Heathen) must be be-leed, and calm'd
By Debitor, and Creditor. This Counter-caster,
He (in good time) must his Lieutenant be,
And I (blesse the marke) his Mooreships Auntient.
+RODORIGO
By heauen, I rather would haue bin his hangman.
+IAGO
Why, there's no remedie. / 'Tis the cursse of Seruice;
Preferment goes by Letter, and affection,
And not by old gradation, where each second
Stood Heire to'th'first. Now Sir, be iudge your selfe,
Whether I in any iust terme am Affin'd
To loue the Moore?
+RODORIGO
I would not follow him then.
+IAGO
O Sir content you.
I follow him, to serue my turne vpon him.
We cannot all be Masters, nor all Masters
Cannot be truely follow'd. You shall marke
Many a dutious and knee-crooking knaue;
That (doting on his owne obsequious bondage)
Weares out his time, much like his Masters Asse,
For naught but Prouender, & when he's old Casheer'd.
Whip me such honest knaues. Others there are
Who trym'd in Formes, and visages of Dutie,
Keepe yet their hearts attending on themselues,
And throwing but showes of Seruice on their Lords
Doe well thriue by them. / And when they haue lin'd their Coates
Doe themselues Homage. / These Fellowes haue some soule,
And such a one do I professe my selfe.
For (Sir)
It is as sure as you are Rodorigo,
Were I the Moore, I would not be Iago:
In following him, I follow but my selfe.
Heauen is my Iudge, not I for loue and dutie,
But seeming so, for my peculiar end:
For when my outward Action doth demonstrate
The natiue act, and figure of my heart
In Complement externe, 'tis not long after
But I will weare my heart vpon my sleeue
For Dawes to pecke at; I am not what I am.
+RODORIGO
What a fall Fortune do's the Thicks-lips owe
If he can carry't thus?
+IAGO
Call vp her Father:
Rowse him, make after him, poyson his delight,
Proclaime him in the Streets. Incense her kinsmen,
And though he in a fertile Clymate dwell,
Plague him with Flies: though that his Ioy be Ioy,
Yet throw such chances of vexation on't,
As it may loose some colour.
+RODORIGO
Heere is her Fathers house, Ile call aloud.
+IAGO
Doe, with like timerous accent, and dire yell,
As when (by Night and Negligence) the Fire
Is spied in populus Citties.
+RODORIGO
What hoa: BRABANTIO, Siginor BRABANTIO, hoa.
+IAGO
Awake: what hoa, BRABANTIO: Theeues, Theeues.
Looke to your house, your daughter, and your Bags,
Theeues, Theeues.
+BRABANTIO
What is the reason of this terrible / Summons?
What is the matter there?
+RODORIGO
Signior is all your Familie within?
+IAGO
Are your Doores lock'd?
+BRABANTIO
Why? Wherefore ask you this?
+IAGO
Sir, y'are rob'd, for shame put on your Gowne,
Your heart is burst, you haue lost halfe your soule
Euen now, now, very now, an old blacke Ram
Is tupping your white Ewe. Arise, arise,
Awake the snorting Cittizens with the Bell,
Or else the deuill will make a Grand-sire of you.
Arise I say.
+BRABANTIO
What, haue you lost your wits?
+RODORIGO
Most reuerend Signior, do you know my voice?
+BRABANTIO
Not I: what are you?
+RODORIGO
My name is Rodorigo.
+BRABANTIO
The worsser welcome:
I haue charg'd thee not to haunt about my doores:
In honest plainenesse thou hast heard me say,
My Daughter is not for thee. And now in madnesse
(Being full of Supper, and distempring draughtes)
Vpon malitious knauerie, dost thou come
To start my quiet.
+RODORIGO
Sir, Sir, Sir.
+BRABANTIO
But thou must needs be sure,
My spirits and my place haue in their power
To make this bitter to thee.
+RODORIGO
Patience good Sir.
+BRABANTIO
What tell'st thou me of Robbing? / This is Venice :
my house is not a Grange.
+RODORIGO
Most graue Brabantio,
In simple and pure soule, I come to you.
+IAGO
Sir: you are one of those that will not serue
God, if the deuill bid you. Because we come to do you
seruice, and you thinke we are Ruffians, you'le haue your
Daughter couer'd with a Barbary horse, you'le haue your
Nephewes neigh to you, you'le haue Coursers for Cozens :
and Gennets for Germaines.
+BRABANTIO
What prophane wretch art thou?
+IAGO
I am one Sir, that comes to tell you, your Daughter
and the Moore, are making the Beast with two
backs.
+BRABANTIO
Thou art a Villaine.
+IAGO
You are a Senator.
+BRABANTIO
This thou shalt answere. I know thee Rodorigo.
+RODORIGO
Sir, I will answere any thing. But I beseech you
If't be your pleasure, and most wise consent,
(As partly I find it is) that your faire Daughter,
At this odde Euen and dull watch o'th'night
Transported with no worse nor better guard,
But with a knaue of common hire, a Gundelier,
To the grosse claspes of a Lasciuious Moore:
If this be knowne to you, and your Allowance,
We then haue done you bold, and saucie wrongs.
But if you know not this, my Manners tell me,
We haue your wrong rebuke. Do not beleeue
That from the sence of all Ciuilitie,
I thus would play and trifle with your Reuerence.
Your Daughter (if you haue not giuen her leaue)
I say againe, hath made a grosse reuolt,
Tying her Dutie, Beautie, Wit, and Fortunes
In an extrauagant, and wheeling Stranger,
Of here, and euery where: straight satisfie your selfe.
If she be in her Chamber, or your house,
Let loose on me the Iustice of the State
For thus deluding you.
+BRABANTIO
Strike on the Tinder, hoa:
Giue me a Taper: call vp all my people,
This Accident is not vnlike my dreame,
Beleefe of it oppresses me alreadie.
Light, I say, light.
SD: +BRABANTIO exits.
+IAGO
Farewell: for I must leaue you.
It seemes not meete, nor wholesome to my place
To be producted, (as if I stay, I shall,)
Against the Moore. For I do know the State,
(How euer this may gall him with some checke)
Cannot with safetie cast-him. For he's embark'd
With such loud reason to the Cyprus Warres,
(Which euen now stands in Act) that for their soules
Another of his Fadome, they haue none,
To lead their Businesse. In which regard,
Though I do hate him as I do hell apines,
Yet, for necessitie of present life,
I must show out a Flag, and signe of Loue,
(Which is indeed but signe) that you shal surely find him
Lead to the Sagitary the raised Search:
And there will I be with him. So farewell.
SD: +IAGO exits.
SD: Enter BRABANTIO, with Seruants and Torches.
+BRABANTIO
It is too true an euill. Gone she is,
And what's to come of my despised time,
Is naught but bitternesse. Now Rodorigo,
Where didst thou see her? (Oh vnhappie Girle)
With the Moore saist thou? (Who would be a Father?)
How didst thou know 'twas she? (Oh she deceaues me
Past thought:) what said she to you? Get moe Tapers:
Raise all my Kindred. Are they married thinke you?
+RODORIGO
Truely I thinke they are.
+BRABANTIO
Oh Heauen: how got she out? / Oh treason of the blood.
Fathers, from hence trust not your Daughters minds
By what you see them act. Is there not Charmes,
By which the propertie of Youth, and Maidhood
May be abus'd? Haue you not read Rodorigo,
Of some such thing?
+RODORIGO
Yes Sir: I haue indeed.
+BRABANTIO
Call vp my Brother: oh would you had had her.
Some one way, some another. Doe you know
Where we may apprehend her, and the Moore?
+RODORIGO
I thinke I can discouer him, if you please
To get good Guard, and go along with me.
+BRABANTIO
Pray you lead on. At euery house Ile call,
(I may command at most) get Weapons (hoa)
And raise some speciall Officers of might:
On good Rodorigo, I will deserue your paines.
SD: Exeunt RODORIGO, BRABANTIO

NS: Act 1 Scene 2
SD: Enter +OTHELLO, +IAGO, Attendants, with Torches.
+IAGO
Though in the trade of Warre I haue slaine men,
Yet do I hold it very stuffe o'th'conscience
To do no contriu'd Murder: I lacke Iniquitie
Sometime to do me seruice. Nine, or ten times
I had thought t'haue yerk'd him here vnder the Ribbes.
+OTHELLO
'Tis better as it is.
+IAGO
Nay but he prated,
And spoke such scuruy, and prouoking termes
Against your Honor,
that with the little godlinesse I haue
I did full hard forbeare him. But I pray you Sir,
Are you fast married? Be assur'd of this,
That the Magnifico is much belou'd,
And hath in his effect a voice potentiall
As double as the Dukes: He will diuorce you.
Or put vpon you, what restraint or greeuance,
The Law (with all his might, to enforce it on)
Will giue him Cable.
+OTHELLO
Let him do his spight;
My Seruices, which I haue done the Signorie
Shall out-tongue his Complaints. 'Tis yet to know,
Which when I know, that boasting is an Honour,
I shall promulgate. I fetch my life and being,
From Men of Royall Seige. And my demerites
May speake (vnbonnetted) to as proud a Fortune
As this that I haue reach'd. For know Iago,
But that I loue the gentle Desdemona,
I would not my vnhoused free condition
Put into Circumscription, and Confine,
For the Seas worth. But looke, what Lights come yond?
+IAGO
Those are the raised Father, and his Friends:
You were best go in.
+OTHELLO
Not I: I must be found.
My Parts, my Title, and my perfect Soule
Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?
+IAGO
By Ianus, I thinke no.
SD: Enter +CASSIO, with Torches.
+OTHELLO
The Seruants of the Dukes? / And my Lieutenant?
The goodnesse of the Night vpon you (Friends)
What is the Newes?
+CASSIO
The Duke do's greet you (Generall)
And he requires your haste, Post-haste appearance,
Euen on the instant.
+OTHELLO
What is the matter, thinke you?
+CASSIO
Something from Cyprus, as I may diuine:
It is a businesse of some heate. The Gallies
Haue sent a dozen sequent Messengers
This very night, at one anothers heeles:
And many of the Consuls, rais'd and met,
Are at the Dukes already. You haue bin hotly call'd for,
When being not at your Lodging to be found,
The Senate hath sent about three seuerall Quests,
To search you out.
+OTHELLO
'Tis well I am found by you:
I will but spend a word here in the house,
And goe with you.
+CASSIO
Aunciant, what makes he heere?
+IAGO
Faith, he to night hath boarded a Land Carract,
If it proue lawfull prize, he's made for euer.
+CASSIO
I do not vnderstand.
+IAGO
He's married.
+CASSIO
To who?
+IAGO
Marry to---Come Captaine, will you go?
+OTHELLO
Haue with you.
SD: Enter +BRABANTIO, +RODORIGO, with Officers, and Torches.
+CASSIO
Here comes another Troope to seeke for you.
+IAGO
It is Brabantio: Generall be aduis'd,
He comes to bad intent.
+OTHELLO
Holla, stand there.
+RODORIGO
Signior, it is the Moore.
+BRABANTIO
Downe with him, Theefe.
+IAGO
You, Rodorigoc?. Cme Sir, I am for you.
+OTHELLO
Keepe vp your bright Swords, for the dew will rust them.
Good Signior, you shall more command with yeares,
then with your Weapons.
+BRABANTIO
Oh thou foule Theefe, / Where hast thou stow'd my Daughter?
Damn'd as thou art, thou hast enchaunted her
For Ile referre me to all things of sense,
(If she in Chaines of Magick were not bound)
Whether a Maid, so tender, Faire, and Happie,
So opposite to Marriage, that she shun'd
The wealthy curled Deareling of our Nation,
Would euer haue (t'encurre a generall mocke)
Run from her Guardage to the sootie bosome,
Of such a thing as thou: to feare, not to delight?
Iudge me the world, if 'tis not grosse in sense,
That thou hast practis'd on her with foule Charmes,
Abus'd her delicate Youth, with Drugs or Minerals,
That weakens Motion. Ile haue't disputed on,
'Tis probable, and palpable to thinking;
I therefore apprehend and do attach thee,
For an abuser of the World, a practiser
Of Arts inhibited, and out of warrant;
Lay hold vpon him, if he do resist
Subdue him, at his perill.
+OTHELLO
Hold your hands
Both you of my inclining, and the rest.
Were it my Cue to fight, I should haue knowne it
Without a Prompter. Whether will you that I goe
To answere this your charge?
+BRABANTIO
To Prison, till fit time
Of Law, and course of direct Session
Call thee to answer.
+OTHELLO
What if do obey?
How may the Duke be therewith satisfi'd,
Whose Messengers are heere about my side,
Vpon some present businesse of the State,
To bring me to him.
+OFFICER
'Tis true most worthy Signior,
The Dukes in Counsell, and your Noble selfe,
I am sure is sent for.
+BRABANTIO
How? The Duke in Counsell?
In this time of the night? Bring him away;
Mine's not an idle Cause. The Duke himselfe,
Or any of my Brothers of the State,
Cannot but feele this wrong, as 'twere their owne:
For if such Actions may haue passage free,
Bond-slaues, and Pagans shall our Statesmen be.
SD: Exeunt OTHELLO, IAGO, CASSIO, BRABANTIO, RODORIGO, OFFICER




NS: Act 1 Scene 3

SD: Enter +DUKE, +SENATORS, and +OFFICERS.

+DUKE
There's no composition in this Newes,
That giues them Credite.

+1.SEN
Indeed, they are disproportioned;
My Letters say, a Hundred and seuen Gallies.

+DUKE
And mine a Hundred fortie.

+2.SENA
And mine two Hundred:
But though they iumpe not on a iust accompt,
(As in these Cases where the ayme reports,
'Tis oft with difference) yet do they all confirme
A Turkish Fleete, and bearing vp to Cyprus.

+DUKE
Nay, it is possible enough to iudgement:
I do not so secure me in the Error,
But the maine Article I do approue
In fearefull sense.

SAILOR
within.
What hoa, what hoa, what hoa.

+OFFICER
A Messenger from the Gallies.

SD: Enter +SAILOR.

+DUKE
Now? What's the businesse?

+SAILOR
The Turkish Preparation makes for Rhodes,
So was I bid report here to the State,
By Signior Angelo.

+DUKE
How say you by this change?

+1.SEN
This cannot be
By no assay of reason. 'Tis a Pageant
To keepe vs in false gaze, when we consider
Th'importancie of Cyprus to the Turke;
And let our selues againe but vnderstand,
That as it more concernes the Turke then Rhodes,
So may he with more facile question beare it,
For that it stands not in such Warrelike brace,
But altogether lackes th'abilities
That Rhodes is dress'd in. If we make thought of this,
We must not thinke the Turke is so vnskillfull,
To leaue that latest, which concernes him first,
Neglecting an attempt of ease, and gaine
To wake, and wage a danger profitlesse.

+DUKE
Nay, in all confidence he's not for Rhodes.

+OFFICER
Here is more Newes.

SD: Enter a +MESSENGER.

+MESSEN
The Ottamites. Reueren'd, and Gracious,
Steering with due course toward the Ile of Rhodes,
Haue there inioynted them with an after Fleete.

+1. SEN
I, so I thought: how many, as you guesse?

+MESS
Of thirtie Saile: and now they do re-stem
Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance
Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano,
Your trustie and most Valiant Seruitour,
With his free dutie, recommends you thus,
And prayes you to beleeue him.

+DUKE
'Tis certaine then for Cyprus:
Marcus Luccicos is not he in Towne?

+1.SEN
He's now in Florence.

+DUKE
Write from vs, / To him,
Post, Post-haste, dispatch.

+1.SEN
Here comes +BRABANTIO, and the Valiant +MOORE.

SD: Enter +BRABANTIO, +OTHELLO, +CASSIO, +IAGO, +RODORIGO, and +OFFICERS.

+DUKE
Valiant +OTHELLO, we must straight employ you
Against the generall Enemy Ottoman.
I did not see you: welcome gentle Signior,
We lack't your Counsaile, and your helpe to night.

+BRA
So did I yours: Good your Grace pardon me.
Neither my place, hor ought I heard of businesse
Hath rais'd me from my bed; nor doth the generall care
Take hold on me. For my perticular griefe
Is of so flood-gate, and ore-bearing Nature,
That it engluts, snd swallowes other sorrowes,
And it is still it selfe.

+DUKE
Why? What's the matter?

+BRA
My Daughter: oh my Daughter!

+SEN
Dead?

+BRA
I, to me.
She is abus'd, stolne from me, and corrupted
By Spels, and Medicines, bought of Mountebanks;
For Nature, so prepostrously to erre,
(Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense,)
Sans witch-craft could not.

+DUKE
Who ere he be, that in this foule proceeding
Hath thus beguil'd your Daughter of her selfe,
And you of her; the bloodie Booke of Law,
You shall your selfe read, in the bitter letter,
After your owne sense: yea, though our proper Son
Stood in your Action.

+BRA
Humbly I thanke your Grace,
Here is the man; this +MOORE, whom now it seemes
Your speciall Mandate, for the State affaires
Hath hither brought.

+DUKE, +SEN, +BRA, +OTHELLO, +CASSIO, +IAGO, +RODORIGO
We are verie sorry for't.

+DUKE
What in yonr owne part, can you say to this?

+BRA
Nothing, but this is so.

+OTHELLO
Most Potent, Graue, and Reueren'd Signiors,
My very Noble, and approu'd good Masters;
That I haue tane away this old mans Daughter,
It is most true: true I haue married her;
The verie head, and front of my offending,
Hath this extent; no more. Rude am I, in my speech,
And little bless'd with the soft phrase of Peace;
For since these Armes of mine, had seuen yeares pith,
Till now, some nine Moones wasted, they haue vs'd
Their deerest action, in the Tented Field:
And little of this great world can I speake,
More then pertaines to Feats of Broiles, and Battaile,
And therefore little shall I grace my cause,
In speaking for my selfe. Yet, (by your gratious patience)
I will a round vn-varnish'd u Tale deliuer,
Of my whole course of Loue. / What Drugges, what Charmes,
What Coniuration, and what mighty Magicke,
(For such proceeding I am charg'd withall)
I won his Daughter.

+BRA
A Maiden, neuer bold:
Of Spirit so still, and quiet, that her Motion
Blush'd at her selfe, and she, in spight of Nature,
Of Yeares, of Country, Credite, euery thing
To fall in Loue, with what she fear'd to looke on;
It is a iudgement main'd, and most imperfect.
That will confesse Perfection so could erre
Against all rules of Nature, and must be driuen
To find out practises of cunning hell
Why this should be. I therefore vouch againe,
That with some Mixtures, powrefull o're the blood,
Or with some Dram, (coniur'd to this effect)
He wtought vp on her.

+SEN
To vouch this, is no proofe,
Without more wider, and more ouer Test
Then these thin habits, and poore likely-hoods
Of moderne seeming, do prefer against him.

+SEN
But +OTHELLO, speake,
Did you, by indirect, and forced courses
Subdue, and poyson this yong Maides affections?
Or came it by request, and such faire question
As soule, to soule affordeth?

+OTHELLO
I do beseech you,
Send for the Lady to the Sagitary.
And let her speake of me before her Father;
If you do finde me foule, in her report,
The Trust, the Office, I do hold of you,
Not onely take away, but let your Sentence
Euen fall vpon my life.

+DUKE
Fetch +DESDEMONA hither.

+OTHELLO
Aunciant, conduct them: / You best know the place.
And tell she come, as truely as to heauen,
I do confesse the vices of my blood,
So iustly to your Graue eares, Ile present
How I did thriue in this faire Ladies loue,
And she in mine.

+DUKE
Say it +OTHELLO.

+OTHELLO
Her Father lou'd me, oft inuited me:
Still question'd me the Storie of my life,
From yeare to yeare: the Battaile, Sieges, Fortune,
That I haue past.
I ran it through, euen from my boyish daies,
Toth'very moment that he bad me tell it.
Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances:
Of mouing Accidents by Flood and Field,
Of haire-breadth scapes i'th'imminent deadly breach;
Of being taken by the Insolent Foe,
And sold to slauery. Of my redemption thence,
And portance in my Trauellours historie.
Wherein of Antars vast, and Desarts idle,
Rough Quarries, Rocks, Hills, whose head touch heauen,
It was my hint to speake. Such was my Processe,
And of the Canibals that each others eate,
The Antropophague, and men whose heads
Grew beneath their shoulders. These things to heare,
Would +DESDEMONA seriously incline:
But still the house Affaires would draw her hence:
Which euer as she could with haste dispatch,
She'l'd come againe, and with a greedie eare
Deuoure vp my discourse. Which I obseruing,
Tooke once a pliant houre, and found good meanes
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart,
That I would all my Pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
But not instinctiuely: I did consent,
And often did beguile her of her teares,
When I did speake of some distressefull stroke
That my youth suffer'd: My Storie being done,
She gaue me for my paines a world of kisses:
She swore in faith 'twas strange: 'twas passing strange,
'Twas pittifull: 'twas wondrous pittifull.
She wish'd she had not heard it, yet she wish'd
That Heauen had made her such a man. She thank'd me,
And bad me, if I had a Friend that lou'd her,
I should but teach him how to tell my Story,
And that would wooe her. Vpon this hint I spake,
She lou'd me for the dangers I had past,
And I lou'd her, that she did pitty them.
This onely is the witch-craft I haue vs'd.
Here comes the Ladie: Let her witnesse it.

SD: Enter +DESDEMONA, +IAGO, +ATTENDANTS.

+DUKE
I thinke this tale would win my Daughter too,
Good +BRABANTIO, take vp this mangled matter at the best:
Men do their broken Weapons rather vse,
Then their bare hands.

+BRA
I pray you heare her speake?
If she confesse that she was halfe the wooer,
Destruction on my head, if my bad blame
Light on the man. Come hither gentle Mistris,
Do you perceiue in all this Noble Companie,
Where most you owe obedience?

+DES
My Noble Father,
I do perceiue heere a diuided dutie.
To you I am bound for life, and education:
My life and education both do learne me,
How to respect you. You are the Lord of duty,
I am hitherto your Daughter. But heere's my Husband;
And so much dutie, as my Mother shew'd
To you, preferring you before her Father:
So much I challenge, that I may professe
Due to the +MOORE my Lord.

+BRA
God be with you: I haue done.
Please it your Grace, on to the State Affaires;
I had rather to adopt a Child, then get it.
Come hither +MOORE;
I here do giue thee that with all my heart,
Which but thou hast already, with all my heart
I would keepe from thee. For your sake (Iewell)
I am glad at soule, I haue no other Child;
For thy escape would teach me Tirranie
To hang clogges on them. I haue done my Lord.

+DUKE
Let me speake like your selfe: / And lay a Sentence,
Which as a grise, or step may helpe these Louers.
When remedies are past, the griefes are ended
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
To mourne a Mischeefe that is past and gon,
Is the next way to draw new mischiefe on.
What cannot be presern'd, when Fortune takes:
Patience, her Iniury a mock'ry makes.
The rob'd that smiles, steales something from the Thiefe,
He robs himselfe, that spends a bootelesse griefe.

+BRA
So let the Turke of Cyprus vs beguile,
We loose it not so long as we can smile:
He beares the Sentence well, that nothing beares,
But the free comfort which from thence he heares.
But he beares both the Sentence, and the sorrow,
That to pay griefe, must of poore Patience borrow.
These Sentences, to Sugar, or to Gall,
Being strong on both sides, are Equiuocall.
But words are words, I neuer yet did heare:
That the bruized heart was pierc'd through the eares.
I humbly beseech you proceed to th'Affaires of State.

+DUKE
The Turke with a most mighty Preparation makes for
Cyprus: +OTHELLO, the Fortitude of the place is best knowne
to you. And though we haue there a Substitute of most
allowed sufficiencie; yet opinion, a more soueraigne Mistris
of Effects, throwes a more safer voice on you: you
must therefore be content to slubber the glosse of your
new Fortunes, with this more stubborne, and boystrous
expedition.

+OTHELLO
The Tirant Custome, most Graue Senators,
Hath made the flinty and Steele Coach of Warre
My thrice-driuen bed of Downe. I do agnize
A Naturall and prompt Alacartie,
I finde in hardnesse: and do vndertake
This present Warres against the Ottamites.
Most humbly therefore bending to your State,
I craue fit disposition for my Wife,
Due reference of Place, and Exhibition,
With such Accomodation and besort
As leuels with her breeding.

+DUKE
Why at her Fathers?

+BRA
I will not haue it so.

+OTHELLO
Nor I.

+DES
Nor would I there recide,
To put my Father in impatient thoughts
By being in his eye. Most Grcaious Duke,
To my vnfolding, lend your prosperous eare,
And let me finde a Charter in your voice
T'assist my simplenesse.

+DUKE
What would you +DESDEMONA?

+DES
That I loue the +MOORE, to liue with him,
My downe-right violence, and storme of Fortunes,
May trumpet to the world. My heart's subdu'd
Euen to the very quality of my Lord;
I saw +OTHELLO's visage in his mind,
And to his Honours and his valiant parts,
Did I my soule and Fortunes consecrate.
So that (deere Lords) if I be left behind
A Moth of Peace, and he go to the Warre,
The Rites for why I loue him, are bereft me:
And I a heauie interim shall support
By his deere absence. Let me go with him.

+OTHELLO
Let her haue your voice.
Vouch with me Heauen, I therefore beg it not
To please the pallate of my Appetite:
Nor to comply with heat the yong affects
In my defunct, and proper satisfaction.
But to be free, and bounteous to her minde:
And Heauen defend your good soules, that you thinke
I will your serious and great businesse scant
When she is with me. No, when light wing'd Toyes
Of feather'd Cupid, seele with wanton dulnesse
My speculatiue, and offic'd Instrument:
That my Disports corrupt, and taint my businesse:
Let House-wiues make a Skillet of my Helme,
And all indigne, and base aduersities,
Make head against my Estimation.

+DUKE
Be it as you shall priuately determine,
Either for her stay, or going: th'Affaire cries hast:
And speed must answer it. +SEN.You must away to night.

+OTHELLO
With all my heart.

+DUKE
At nine i'th'morning, here wee'l meete againe.
+OTHELLO, leaue some Officer behind
And he shall our Commission bring to you:
And such things else of qualitie and respect
As doth import you.

+OTHELLO
So please your Grace, my Ancient,
A man he is of honesty and trust:
To his conueyance I assigne my wife,
With what else needfull, your good Grace shall think
To be sent after me.

+DUKE
Let it be so:
Good night to euery one. And Noble Signior,
If Vertue no delighted Beautie lacke,
Your Son-in-law is farre more Faire then Blacke.

+SEN
Adieu braue +MOORE, vse +DESDEMONA well.

+BRA
Looke to her (Moore) if thou hast eies to see:
She ha's deceiu'd her Father, and may thee.
BRA exits.

+OTHELLO
My life vpon her faith.
Honest +IAGO,
My +DESDEMONA must I leaue to thee:
I prythee let thy wife attend on her,
And bring them after in the best aduantage.
Come +DESDEMONA, I haue but an houre
Of Loue, of wordly matter, and direction
To spend with thee. We must obey the the time.
OTHELLO exits.

+ROD
Iago.

+IAGO
What saist thou Noble heart?

+ROD
What will I do, think'st thou?

+IAGO
Why go to bed and sleepe.

+ROD
I will incontinently drowne my selfe.

+IAGO
If thou do'st, I shall neuer loue thee after. Why thou
silly Gentleman?

+ROD
It is sillynesse to liue, when to liue is torment:
and then haue we a prescription to dye, when death is
our Physition.

+IAGO
Oh villanous: I haue look'd vpon the world for foure
times seuen yeares, and since I could distinguish betwixt
a Benefit, and an Iniurie: I neuer found man that knew
how to loue himselfe. Ere I would say, I would drowne
my selfe for the loue of a Gynney Hen, I would change my
Humanity with a Baboone.

+ROD
What should I do? I confesse it is my shame to
be so fond, but it is not in my vertue to amend it.

+IAGO
Vertue? A figge, 'tis in our selues that we are thus, or
thus. Our Bodies are our Gardens, to the which, our Wills
are Gardiners. So that if we will plant Nettels, or sowe
Lettice: Set Hisope, and weede vp Time: Supplie it with
one gender of Hearbes, or distract it with many: either to
haue it sterrill with idlenesse, or manured with Industry,
why the power, and Corrigeable authoritie of this lies
in our Wills. If the braine of our liues had not one Scale
of Reason, to poize another of Sensualitie, the blood, and
basenesse of our Natures would conduct vs to most
prepostrous Conclusions. But we haue Reason to coole
our raging Motions, our carnall Stings, or vnbitted Lusts:
whereof I take this, that you call Loue, to be a Sect, or
Seyen.

+ROD
It cannot be.

+IAGO
It is meerly a Lust of the blood, and a permission of
the will. Come, be a man: drowne thy selfe? Drown Cats,
and blind Puppies. I haue profest me thy Friend, and
I confesse me knit to thy deseruing, with Cables of perdurable
toughnesse. I could neuer better steed thee then
now. Put Money in thy purse: follow thou the Warres,
defeate thy fauour, with an vsurp'd Beard. I say put
Money in thy purse. It cannot be long that +DESDEMONA should
continue her loue to the +MOORE. Put Money in thy
purse: nor he his to her. It was a violent Commencement in her,
and thou shalt see an answerable Sequestration,
put but Money in thy purse. These +MOORES are changeable
in their wils: fill thy purse with Money. The Food
that to him now is as lushious as Locusts, shalbe to him
shortly, as bitter as Coloquintida. She must change
for youth: when she is sated with his body she will find
the errors of her choice. Therefore, put Money in thy
purse. If thou wilt needs damne thy selfe, do it a more
delicate way then drowning. Make all the Money thou
canst: If Sanctimonie, and a fraile vow, betwixt an erring
Barbarian, and super-subtle Venetian be not too hard
for my wits, and all the Tribe of hell, thou shalt enioy
her: therefore make Money: a pox of drowning thy selfe,
it is cleane out of the way. Seeke thou rather to be hang'd
in Compassing thy ioy, then to be drown'd, and go
without her.

+RODO
Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on
the issue?

+IAGO
Thou art sure of me: Go make Money: I haue told
thee often, and I re-tell thee againe, and againe, I hate
the +MOORE. My cause is hearted; thine hath no lesse
reason. Let vs be coniunctiue in our reuenge, against
him. If thou canst Cuckold him, thou dost thy selfe a
pleasure, me a sport. There are many Euents in the
Wombe of Time, which wilbe deliuered. Trauerse, go,
prouide thy Money. We will haue more of this to morrow.
Adieu.

+ROD
Where shall we meete i'th'morning?

+IAGO
At my Lodging.

+ROD
Ile be with thee betimes.

+IAGO
Go too, farewell. Do you heare +RODORIGO?

+ROD
Ile sell all my Land.
ROD exits.

+IAGO
Thus do I euer make my Foole, my purse:
For I mine owne gain'd knowledge should prophane
IfI would time expend with such Snpe,
But for my Sport, and Profit: I hate the +MOORE,
And it is thought abroad, that 'twixt my sheets
She ha's done my Office. I know not if't be true,
But I, for meere suspition in that kinde,
Will do, as if for Surety. He holds me well,
The better shall my purpose worke on him:
Cassio's a proper man: Let me see now,
To get his Place, and to plume vp my will
In double Knauery. How? How? Let's see.
After some time, to abuse +OTHELLO's eares,
That he is too familiar with his wife:
He hath a person, and a smooth dispose
To be suspected: fram'd to make women false.
The +MOORE is of a free, and open Nature,
That thinkes men honest, that but seeme to be so,
And will as tenderly be lead by'th'Nose
As Asses are:
I haue't: it is engendred: Hell, and Night,
Must bring this monstrous Birth, to the worlds light.




NS: Act 2 Scene 1

SD: Enter +MONTANO, and two Gentlemen.
+MONTANO
What from the Cape, can you discerne at Sea?
+GENTLEMAN
Nothing at all, it is a high wrought Flood:
I cannot 'twixt the Heauen, and the Maine,
Descry a Saile.
+MONTANO
Me thinks, the wind hath spoke aloud at Land,
A fuller blast ne're shooke our Battlements:
If it hath ruffiand so vpon the Sea,
What ribbes of Oake, when Mountaines melt on them,
Can hold the Morties. What shall we heare of this?
+GENTLEMAN
A Segregation of the Turkish Fleet:
For do but stand vpon the Foaming Shore,
The chidden Billow seemes to pelt the Clowds,
The winde-shak'd-Surge, with high & monstrous Maine
Seemes to cast water on the burning Beare,
And quench the Guards of th'euer-fixed Pole:
I neuer did like mollestation view
On the enchafed Flood.
+MONTANO
If that the Turkish Fleete
Be not enshelter'd, and embay'd, they are drown'd,
It is impossible to beare it out.
SD: Enter a Gentleman.
+GENTLEMAN
Newes Laddes: our warres are done:
The desperate Tempest hath so bang'd the Turkes,
That their designement halts. A Noble ship of Venice,
Hath seene a greeuous wracke and sufferance
On most part of their Fleet.
+MONTANO
How? Is this true ?
+GENTLEMAN
The Ship is heere put in :
A Verennessa, +MICHAEL CASSIO
Lieutenant to the warlike Moore, +OTHELLO,
Is come on Shore: the Moore himselfe at Sea,
And is in full Commission heere for Cyprus.
+MONTANO
I am glad on't: / 'Tis a worthy Gouernour.
+GENTLEMAN
But this same Cassio, though he speake of comfort,
Touching the Turkish losse, yet he lookes sadly,
And praye the Moore be safe; for they were parted
With fowle and violent Tempest.
+MONTANO
Pray Heauens he be:
For I haue seru'd him, and the man commands
Like a full Soldier. Let's to the Sea-side (hoa)
As well to see the Vessell that's come in,
As to throw-out our eyes for braue Othello,
Euen till we make the Maine, and th'Eriall blew,
An indistinct regard.
+GENTLEMAN
Come, let's do so;
For euery Minute is expectancie
Of more Arriuancie.
SD: Enter +CASSIO.
+CASSIO
Thankes you, the valiant of the warlike Isle,
That so approoue the Moore: Oh let the Heauens
Giue him defence against the Elements,
For I haue lost him on a dangerous Sea.
+MONTANO
Is he well ship'd?
+CASSIO
His Barke is stoutly Timber'd, and his Pylot
Of verie expert, and approu'd Allowance;
Therefore my hope's (not surfetted to death)
Stand in bold Cure.
SD: Within.
A Saile, a Saile, a Saile.
+CASSIO
What noise?
+GENTLEMAN
The Towne is empty; on the brow o'th'Sea
Stand rankes of People, and they cry, a Saile.
+CASSIO
My hopes do shape him for the Gouernor.
+GENTLEMAN
They do discharge their Shot of Courtesie,
Our Friends, at least.
+CASSIO
I pray you Sir, go forth,
And giue vs truth who 'tis that is arriu'd.
SD: +GENTLEMAN exits
+MONTANO
But good Lieutenant, is your Generall wiu'd?
+CASSIO
Most fortunately: he hath atchieu'd a Maid
That paragons description, and wilde Fame:
One that excels the quirkes of Blazoning pens,
And in th'essentiall Vesture of Creation,
Do's tyre the Ingeniuer.
SD: Enter Gentleman.
+GENTLEMAN
How now? Who ha's put in?
+GENTLEMAN
'Tis one +IAGO, Auncient to the Generall.
+CASSIO
Ha's had most fauourable, and happie speed:
Tempests themselues, high Seas, and howling windes,
The gutter'd-Rockes, and Congregated Sands,
Traitors ensteep'd, to enclogge the guiltlesse Keele,
As hauing sence of Beautie, do omit
Their mortall Natures, letting go safely by
The Diuine +DESDEMONA.
+MONTANO
What is she?
+CASSIO
She that I spake of: / Our great Captains Captaine,
Left in the conduct of the bold +IAGO,
Whose footing heere anticipates our thoughts,
A Senights speed. Great Ioue, Othello guard,
And swell his Saile with thine owne powrefull breath,
That he may blesse this Bay with his tall Ship,
Make loues quicke pants in Desdemonaes Armes,
Giue renew'd fire to our extincted Spirits.
SD: Enter +DESDEMONA, +IAGO, +RODORIGO, and +AMILIA.
+CASSIO
Oh behold,
The Riches of the Ship is come on shore:
You men of Cyprus, let her haue your knees.
Haile to thee Ladie: and the grace of Heauen,
Before, behinde thee, and on euery hand
Enwheele thee round.
+DESDEMONA
I thanke you, Valiant +CASSIO,
What tydings can you tell of my Lord?
+CASSIO
He is not yet arriu'd, nor know I ought
But that he's well, and will be shortly heere.
+DESDEMONA
Oh, but I feare: / How lost you company?
+CASSIO
The great Contention of Sea, and Skies
Parted our fellowship.
SD: Within.
A Saile, a Saile.
+CASSIO
But hearke, a Saile.
+GENTLEMAN
They giue this greeting to the Cittadell:
This likewise is a Friend.
+CASSIO
See for the Newes:
Good Ancient, you are welcome. Welcome Mistris:
Let it not gaule your patience (good Iago)
That I extend my Manners. 'Tis my breeding,
That giues me this bold shew of Curtesie.
+IAGO
Sir, would she giue you somuch of her lippes,
As of her tongue she oft bestowes on me,
You would haue enough.
+DESDEMONA
Alas: she ha's no speech.
+IAGO
Infaith too much:
I finde it still, when I haue leaue to sleepe.
Marry before your Ladyship, I grant,
She puts het tongue a little in her heart,
And chides with thinking.
+AMILIA
You haue little cause to say so.
+IAGO
Come on, come on: you are Pictures out of doore:
Bells in your Parlours: Wilde-Cats in your Kitchens: Saints
in your Iniuries: Diuels being offended: Players in your
Huswiferie, and Huswiues in your Beds.
+DESDEMONA
Oh, fie vpon thee, Slanderer
+IAGO
Nay, it is true: or else I am a Turke,
You rise to play, and go to bed to worke.
+AMILIA
You shall not write my praise.
+IAGO
No, let me not.
+DESDEMONA
What would'st write of me, if thou should'st praise me?
+IAGO
Oh, gentle Lady, do not put me too,t,
For I am nothing, if not Criticall.
+DESDEMONA
Come on, assay. / There's one gone to the Harbour?
+IAGO
I Madam.
+DESDEMONA
I am not merry: but I do beguile
The thing I am, by seeming otherwise.
Come, how would'st thou praise me?
+IAGO
I am about it, but indeed my inuention
comes from my pate, as Birdlyme do's from Freeze,
it pluckes out Braines and all. But my Muse labours,
and thus she is deliuer'd.
If she be faire, and wise: fairenesse, and wit,
The ones for vse, the other vseth it.
+DESDEMONA
Well prais'd: How if she be Blacke and Witty?
+IAGO
If she be blacke, and thereto haue a wit,
She'le find a white, that shall her blacknesse fit.
+DESDEMONA
Worse, and worse.
+AMILIA
How if Faire, and Foolish?
+IAGO
She neuer yet was foolish that was faire,
For euen her folly helpt her to an heire.
+DESDEMONA
These are old fond Paradoxes, to make Fooles
laugh i'th'Alehouse. What miserable praise hast thou for
her that's Foule, and Foolish.
+IAGO
There's none so foule and foolish thereunto,
But do's foule pranks, which faire, and wise-ones do.
+DESDEMONA
Oh heauy ignorance: thou praisest the worst
best. But what praise could'st thou bestow on a deseruing
woman indeed? One, that in the authorithy of her merit,
did iustly put on the vouch of very malice it selfe.
+IAGO
She that was euer faire, and neuer proud,
Had Tongue at will, and yet was neuer loud:
Neuer lackt Gold, and yet went neuer gay,
Fled from her wish, and yet said now I may.
She that being angred, her reuenge being nie,
Bad her wrong stay, and her displeasure flie:
She that in wisedome neuer was so fraile,
To change the Cods-head for the Salmons taile:
She that could thinke, and neu'r disclose her mind,
See Suitors following, and not looke behind:
She was a wight, (if euer such wightes were)
+DESDEMONA
To do what?
+IAGO
To suckle Fooles, and chronicle small Beere.
+DESDEMONA
Oh most lame and impotent conclusion.
Do not learne of him +Amillia, though he be thy husband.
How say you (Cassio) is he not a most prophane, and
liberall Counsailor?
+CASSIO
He speakes home (Madam) you may rellish him more
in the Souldier, then in the Scholler.
+IAGO
He takes her by the palme: I, well said,
whisper. With as little a web as this, will I ensnare as
great a Fly as Cassio. I smile vpon her, do: I will
giue thee in thine owne Courtship. You say true, 'tis so
indeed. If such tricks as these strip you out of your
Lieutenantrie, it had beene better you had not kiss'd your
three fingers so oft, which now againe you are most apt
to play the Sir, in. Very good: well kiss'd, and excellent
Curtsie: 'tis so indeed. Yet againe, your fingers to your
lippes? Would they were Cluster-pipes for your sake.
The Moore I know his Trumpet.
+CASSIO
'Tis truely so.
+DESDEMONA
Let's meete him, and recieue him.
+CASSIO
Loe, where he comes.
SD: Enter +OTHELLO, and Attendants.
+OTHELLO
O, my faire Warriour.
+DESDEMONA
My deere +OTHELLO.
+OTHELLO
It giues me wonder great, as my content
To see you heere before me. / Oh my Soules Ioy:
If after euery Tempest, come such Calmes,
May the windes blow, till they haue waken'd death:
And let the labouring Barke climbe hills of Seas
Olympus high: and duck againe as low,
As hell's from Heauen. If it were now to dye,
'Twere now to be most happy. For I feare,
My Soule hath her content so absolute,
That not another comfort like to this,
Succeedes in vnknowne Fate.
+DESDEMONA
The Heauens forbid
But that our Loues / And Comforts should encrease
Euen as our dayes do grow.
+OTHELLO
Amen to rhat (sweet Powers)
I cannot speake enough of this content,
It stoppes me heere: it is too much of ioy.
And this, and this the greatest discords be
That ere our hearts shall make.
+IAGO
Oh you are well tun'd now:
But Ile set downe the peggs that make this Musicke,
as honest as I am.
+OTHELLO
Come: let vs to the Castle.
Newes (Friends) our Warres are done: / The Turkes are drown'd.
How do's my old Acquaintance of this Isle?
(Hony) you shall be well desir'd in Cyprus,
I haue found great loue among'st them. Oh my Sweet,
I prattle out of fashion, and I doate
In mine owne comforts. I prythee, good Iago,
Go to the Bay, and disimbarke my Coffers:
Bring thou the Master to the Cittadell,
He is a good one, and his worthynesse
Do's challenge much respect. Come Desdemona,
Once more well met at Cyprus.
SD: +OTHELLO and +DESDEMONA exit
+IAGO
Do thou meet me presently at
the Harbour. Come thither, if thou be'st
Valiant, (as they say base men being in Loue, haue then a
Nobilitie in their Natures, more then is natiue to them)
list-me; the Lieutenant to night watches on the Court of Guard.
First, I must tell thee this: Desdemona, is directly
in loue with him.
+RODORIGO
With him? Why,'tis not possible.
+IAGO
Lay thy finger thus: and let thy soule be instructed.
Marke me with what violence she first lou'd the Moore,
but for bragging, and telling her fantasticall lies.
To loue him still for prating, let not thy discreet
heart thinke it. Her eye must be fed. And what delight
shall she haue to looke on the diuell? When the Blood is
made dull with the Act of Sport, there should be a game
to enflame it, and to giue Satiety a fresh appetite. Louelinesse
in fauour, simpathy in yeares, Manners, and Beauties: all
which the Moore is defectiue in. Now for want of these
requir'd Conueniences, her delicate tendernesse wil finde
it selfe abus'd, begin to heaue the, gorge, disrellish and
abhorre the Moore, very Nature wil instruct her in it, and
compell her to some second choice. Now Sir, this granted
(as it is a most pregnant and vnforc'd position) who
stands so eminent in the degree of this Forune, as
Cassio do's: a knaue very voluble: no further conscionable,
then in putting on the meere forme of Ciuill, and
Humaine seeming, for the better compasse of his salt,
and most hidden loose Affection? Why none, why none:
A slipper, and subtle knaue, a finder of occasion:
that he's an eye can stampe, and counterfeit Aduantages,
though true Aduantage neuer present it selfe. A diuelish
knaue: besides, the knaue is handsome, young: and hath
all those requisites in him, that folly and greene mindes
looke after. A pestilent compleat knaue, and the woman
hath found him already.
+RODORIGO
I cannot beleeue that in her, she's full of most
bless'd condition.
+IAGO
Bless'd figges-end. The Wine she drinkes is made of
grapes. If shee had beene bless'd, shee would neuer haue
lou'd the Moore: Bless'd pudding. Didst thou not see her
paddle with the palme of his hand? Didst not marke that?
+RODORIGO
Yes, that I did: but that was but curtesie.
+IAGO
Leacherie by this hand: an Index, and obscure prologue
to the History of Lust and foule Thoughts. They met
so neere with their lippes, that their breathes embrac'd
together. Villanous thoughts Rodorigo, when these
mutabilities so marshall the way, hard at hand comes the
Master, and maine exercise, th'incorporate conclusion:
Pish. But Sir, be you rul'd by me. I haue brought you
from Venice. Watch you to night: for the Command, Ile
lay't vpon you. Cassio knowes you not: Ile not be farre
from you. Do you finde some occasion to anger Cassio,
either by speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, or
from what other course you please, which the time shall
more fauorably minister.
+RODORIGO
Well.
+IAGO
Sir, he's rash, and very sodaine in Choller: and happely
may strike at you, prouoke him that
he may: for euen out of that will I cause these of Cyprus
to Mutiny. Whose qualification shall come into no true
taste againe, but by the displanting of Cassio. So shall you
haue a shorter iourney to your desires, by the meanes I
shall then haue to preferre them. And the impediment most
profitably remoued, without the which there were no
expectation of our prosperitie.
+RODORIGO
I will do this, if you can bring it to any
opportunity.
+IAGO
I warrant thee. Meete me by and by at the Cittadell. I
must fetch his Necessaries a Shore. Farewell.
+RODORIGO
Adieu.
SD: +RODORIGO exits
+IAGO
That Cassio loues her, I do well beleeu't:
That she loues him, 'tis apt, and of great Credite.
The Moore (how beit that I endure him not)
Is of a constant, louing, Noble Nature,
And I dare thinke, he'le proue to Desdemona
A most deere husband. Now I do loue her too,
Not out of absolute Lust, (though peraduenture
I stand accomptant for as great a sin)
But partely led to dyet my Reuenge,
For that I do suspect the lustie Moore
Hath leap'd into my Seate. The thought whereof,
Doth (like a poysonous Minerall) gnaw my Inwardes:
And nothing can, or shall content my Soule
Till I am eeuen'd with him, wife, for wift.
Or fayling so, yet that I put the Moore,
At least into a Ielouzie so strong
That iudgement cannot cure. Which thing to do,
If this poore Trash of Venice, whom I trace
For his quicke hunting, stand the putting on,
Ile haue our Michael Cassio on the hip,
Abuse him to the Moore, in the right garbe
(For I feare Cassio with my Night-Cape too)
Make the Moore thanke me, loue me, and reward me,
For making him egregiously an Asse,
And practising vpon his peace, and quiet,
Euen to madnesse. 'Tis heere: but yet confus'd,
Knaueries plaine face, is neuer seene, till vs'd.
SD: +IAGO exits
Exuent MONTANO, GENTLEMAN, CASSIO, DESDEMONA, AMILIA

NS: Act 2 Scene 2

SD: Enter +OTHELLO'S, Herald with a Proclamation.
+HERALD
It is Othello's pleasure, our Noble and Valiant
Generall. That vpon certaine tydings now arriu'd, importing
the meere perdition of the Turkish Fleete: euery man put
himselfe into Triumph. Some to daunce, some to make
Bonfires, each man, to what Sport and Reuels his addition
leads him. For besides these beneficiall Newes, it is the
Celebration of his Nuptiall. So much was his pleasure
should be proclaimed. All offices are open, & there is
full libertie of Feasting from this presenr houre of fiue,
till the Bell haue told eleuen. Blesse the Isle of
Cyprus, and our Noble Generall Othello.
SD: +HERALD exits




NS: Act 2 Scene 3

SD: Enter +OTHELLO, +DESDEMONA, +CASSIO, and Attendants.

+OTHELLO
Good Michael, looke you to the guard to night.
Let's teach our selues that Honourable stop,
Not to out-sport discretion.

+CASSIO
Iago, hath direction what to do.
But notwithstanding with my personall eye
Will I looke to't.

+OTHELLO
Iago, is most honest:
Michael, goodnight. To morrow with your earliest,
Let me haue speech with you. Come my deere Loue,
The purchase made, the fruites are to ensue,
That profit's yet to come 'tweene me, and you.
Goodnight.

+OTHELLO exits
SD: Enter +IAGO.

+CASSIO
Welcome Iago: we must to the Watch.

+IAGO
Not this houre Lieutenant: 'tis not yet ten o'th'clocke.
Our Generall cast vs thus earely for the loue of his
Desdemona: Who, let vs not therefore blame; he hath
not yet made wanton the night with her: and she is
sport for Ioue.

+CASSIO
She's a most exquisite Lady.

+IAGO
And Ile warrant her, full of Game.

+CASSIO
Indeed shes a most fresh and delicate creature.

+IAGO
What an eye she ha's? / Methinkes it sounds a parley to
prouocation.

+CASSIO
An inuiting eye:/ And yet me thinkes right modest.

+IAGO
And when she speakes, / Is it not an Alarum to Loue?

+CASSIO
She is indeed perfection.

+IAGO
Well: happinesse to their Sheetes. Come Lieutenant,
I haue a stope of Wine, and heere without are a brace of
Cyprus Gallants, that would faine haue a measure to the
health of blacke Othello.

+CASSIO
Not to night, good Iago, I haue very poore, and
vnhappie Braines for drinking. I could well wish Curtesie
would inuent some other Custome of entertainment.

+IAGO
Oh, they are our Friends: but one Cup, Ile drinke for
you.

+CASSIO
I haue drunke but one Cup to night, and that was
craftily qualified too: and behold what inouation it
makes heere. I am infortunate in the infirmity, and dare
not taske my weakenesse with any more.

+IAGO
What man? 'Tis a night of Reuels, the Gallants desire
it.

+CASSIO
Where are they?

+IAGO
Heere, at the doore: I pray you call them in.

+CASSIO
Ile do't, but it dislikes me.

+CASSIO exits

+IAGO
If I can fasten but one Cup vpon him
With that which he hath drunke to night alreadie,
He'l be as full of Quarrell, and offence
As my yong Mistris dogge. / Now my sicke Foole Rodorigo,
Whom Loue hath turn'd almost the wrong side out,
To Desdemona hath to night Carrows'd.
Potations, pottle-deepe; and he's to watch.
Three else of Cyprus, Noble swelling Spirites,
(That hold their Honours in a wary distance,
The very Elements of this Warrelike Isle)
Haue I to night fluster'd with flowing Cups,
And they Watch too. / Now 'mongst this Flocke of drunkards
Am I put to our Cassio in some Action
That may offend the Isle. But here they come.
If Consequence do but approue my dreame,
My Boate sailes freely, both with winde and Streame.
SD: Enter +CASSIO, +MONTANO, and Gentlemen.

+CASSIO
'Fore heauen, they haue giuen me a rowse already.

+MONTANO
Good-faith a litle one: not past a pint, as I am
a Souldier.

+IAGO
Some Wine hoa.
And let me the Cannakin clinke, clinke:
And let me the Cannakin clinke.
A Souldiers a man:
Oh, mans life's but a span,
Why then let a Souldier drinke.
Some Wine Boyes.

+CASSIO
'Fore Heauen: an excellent Song.

+IAGO
I learn'd it in England: where indeed they are most
potent in Potting. Your Dane, your Germaine, and your
swag-belly'd Hollander, (drinke hoa) are nothing to
your English.

+CASSIO
Is your Englishmen so exquisite in his drinking?

+IAGO
Why, he drinkes you with facillitie, your Dane dead
drunke. He sweates not to ouerthrow your Almaine. He
giues your Hollander a vomit, ere the next Pottle can be
fill'd.

+CASSIO
To the health of our Generall.

+MONTANO
I am for it Lieutenant: and Ile do you
Iustice.

+IAGO
Oh sweet England.
King Stephen was and-a worthy Peere,
His Breeches cost him but a Crowne,
He held them Six pence all to deere,
With that he cal'd the Tailor Lowne:
He was a wight of high Renowne,
And thou art but of low degree:
'Tis Pride that pulls the Country downe,
And take thy awl'd Cloake about thee.
Some Wine hoa.

+CASSIO
Why this is a more exquisite Song then the
other.

+IAGO
Will you heare't againe?

+CASSIO
No: for I hold him to be vnworthy of his Place,
that do's those things. Well: heau'ns aboue all: and there
be soules must be saued, and there be soules must not be
saued.

+IAGO
It's true, good Lieutenant.

+CASSIO
For mine owne part, no offence to the Generall,
nor any man of qualitie: I hope to be saued.

+IAGO
And so do I too Lieutenant.

+CASSIO
I: (but by your leaue) not before me. The
Lieutenant is to be saued before the Ancient. Let's haue
no more of this: let's to our Affaires. Forgiue vs our
sinnes: Gentlemen let's looke to our businesse. Do not
thinke Gentlemen, I am drunke: this is my Ancient, this
is my right hand, and this is my left. I am not drunke
now: I can stand well enough, and I speake well enough.

+GENT
Excellent well.

+CASSIO
Why very well then: you must not thinke then, that I
am drunke.

+CASSIO exits

+MONTANO
To th'Platforme (Masters) come, let's set the
Watch.

+IAGO
You see this Fellow, that is gone before,
He's a Souldier, fit to stand by Casar,
And giue direction. And do but see his vice,
'Tis to his vertue, a iust Equinox,
The one as long as th'other. 'Tis pittie of him:
I feare the trust Othello puts him in,
On some odde time of his infirmitie
Will shake this Island.

+MONTANO
But is he often thus?

+IAGO
'Tis euermore his prologue to his sleepe,
He'le watch the Horologe a double Set,
If Drinke rocke not his Cradle.

+MONTANO
It were well
The Generall were put in mind of it:
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
Prizes the vertue that appeares in CASSIO,
And lookes not on his euills: is not this true?
SD: Enter +RODORIGO.

+IAGO
How now Rodorigo?
I pray you after the Lieutenant, go.

+MONTANO
And 'tis great pitty, that the Noble Moore
Should hazard such a Place, as his owne Second
With one of an ingraft Infirmitie,
It were an honest Action, to say
so / To the Moore.

+IAGO
Not I, for this faire Island,
I do loue CASSIO well: and would do much
To cure him of this euill,
But hearke, what noise?
SD: Enter +CASSIO pursuing +RODORIGO.

+CASSIO
You Rogue: you Rascall.

+MONTANO
What's the matter Lieutenant?

+CASSIO
A Knaue teach me my dutie? Ile beate the Knaue into
a Twiggen-Bottle.

+RODORIGO
Beate me?

+CASSIO
Dost thou prate, Rogue?

+MONTANO
Nay, good Lieutenant: / I pray you Sir, hold
your hand.

+CASSIO
Let me go (Sir) / Or Ile knocke you o're the Mazard.

+MONTANO
Come, come: you're drunke.

+CASSIO
Drunke?

+IAGO
Away I say: go out and cry a Mutinie.
Nay good Lieutenant. Alas Gentlemen:
Helpe hoa. Lieutenant. Sir Montano:
Helpe Masters. Heere's a goodly Watch indeed.
Who's that which rings the Bell: Diablo, hoa:
The Towne will rise. Fie, fie Lieutenant,
You'le be asham'd for euer.
SD: Enter +OTHELLO, and Attendants.

+OTHELLO
What is the matter heere?

+MONTANO
I bleed still,
I am hurt to th'death. He dies.

+OTHELLO
Hold for your liues.

+IAGO
Hold hoa: Lieutenant, Sir Montano, Gentlemen:
Haue you forgot all place of sense and dutie?
Hold. The Generall speaks to you: hold for shame.

+OTHELLO
Why how now hoa? From whence ariseth this?
Are we turn'd Turkes? and to our selues do that
Which Heauen hath forbid the Ottamittes.
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous Brawle:
He that stirs next, to carue for his owne rage,
Holds his soule light: He dies vpon his Motion.
Silence that dreadfull Bell, it frights the Isle,
From her propriety. What is the matter, Masters?
Honest Iago, that lookes dead with greeuing,
Speake: who began this? On thy loue I charge thee?

+IAGO
I do not know: Friends all, but now, euen now.
In Quarter, and in termes like Bride, and Groome
Deuesting them for Bed: and then, but now:
(As if some Planet had vnwitted men)
Swords out, and tilting one at others breastes,
In opposition bloody. I cannot speake
Any begining to this peeuish oddes.
And would, in Action glorious, I had lost
Those legges, that brought me to a part of it.

+OTHELLO
How comes it (Michaell) you are thus forgot?

+CASSIO
I pray you pardon me, I cannot speake.

+OTHELLO
Worthy Montano, you were wont to be ciuill:
The grauitie, and stillnesse of your youth
The world hath noted. And your name is great
In mouthes of wisest Censure. What's the matter
That you vnlace your reputation thus,
And spend your rich opinion, for the name
Of a night-brawler? Giue me answer to it.

+MONTANO
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger,
Your Officer Iago, can informe you,
While I spare speech which something now offends me.
Of all that I do know, nor know I ought
By me, that's said, or done amisse this night,
Vnlesse selfe-charitie be sometimes a vice,
And to defend our selues, it be a sinne
When violence assailes vs.

+OTHELLO
Now by Heauen,
My blood begins my safer Guides to rule,
And passion (hauing my best iudgement collied)
Assaies to leade the way. If I once stir,
Or do but lift this Arme, the best of you
Shall sinke in my rebuke. Giue me to know
How this foule Rout began: Who set it on,
And he that is approu'd in this offence,
Though he had twinn'd with me, both at a birth,
Shall loose me. What in a Towne of warre,
Yet wilde, the peoples hearts brim-full of feare,
To Manage priuate, and domesticke Quarrell?
In night, and on the Court and Guard of safetie?
'Tis monstrous: Iago, who began't?

+MONTANO
If partially Affin'd, or league in office,
Thou dost deliuer more, or lesse then Truth,
Thou art no Souldier.

+IAGO
Touch me not so neere,
I had rather haue this tongue cut from my mouth,
Then it should do offence to Michaell CASSIO.
Yet I perswade my selfe, to speake the truth
Shall nothing wrong him. This it is Generall:
Montano and my selfe being in speech,
There comes a Fellow, crying out for helpe,
And CASSIO following him with determin'd Sword
To execute vpon him. Sir, this Gentleman,
Steppes in to CASSIO, and entreats his pause;
My selfe, the crying Fellow did pursue,
Least by hisclamour (as it so fell out)
The Towne might fall in fright. He, (swift of foote)
Out-ran my purpose: and I return'd then rather
For that I heard the clinke, and fall of Swords,
And CASSIO high in oath: Which till to night
I nere might say before. When I came backe
(For this was briefe) I found them close together
At blow, and thrust, euen as againe they were
When you your selfe did part them.
More of this matter cannot I report,
But Men are Men: The best sometimes forget,
Though CASSIO did some little wrong to him,
As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
Yet surely CASSIO, I beleeue receiu'd
From him that fled, some strange Indignitie,
Which patience could not passe.

+OTHELLO
I know Iago
Thy honestie, and loue doth mince this matter,
Making it light to CASSIO: CASSIO, I loue thee,
But neuer more be Officer of mine.
SD: Enter +DESDEMONA attended.

+OTHELLO
Looke if my gentle Loue be not rais'd vp:
Ile make thee an example.

+DESDEMONA
What is the matter (Deere?)

+OTHELLO
All's well, Sweeting: / Come away to bed.
Sir for your hurts, / My selfe will be your Surgeon. Lead him off:
Iago, looke with care about the Towne,
And silence those whom this vil'd brawle distracted.
Come Desdemona, 'tis the Soldiers life,
To haue their Balmy slumbers wak'd with strife.

+OTHELLO exits

+IAGO
What are you hurt Lieutenant?

+CASSIO
I, past all Surgery.

+IAGO
Marry Heauen forbid.

+CASSIO
Reputation, Reputation, Reputation: Oh I haue lost
my Reputation. I haue lost the immortall part of myselfe,
and what remaines is bestiall. My Reputation, Iago, my
Reputation.

+IAGO
As I am an honest man I had thought you had receiued
some bodily wound; there is more sence in that
then in Reputation. Reputation is an idle, and most false
imposition; oft got without merit, aud lost without
deseruing. You haue lost no Reputation at all, vnlesse you
repute your selfe such a looser. What man, there are
more wayes to recouer the Generall againe. You are but now cast
in his moode, (a punishment more in policie, then in
malice) euen so as one would beate his offencelesse dogge, ro
affright an Imperious Lyon. Sue to him againe, and he's
yours.

+CASSIO
I will rather sue to be despis'd, then to deceiue so
good a Commander, with so slight, so drunken, and so
indiscreet an Officer. Drunke? And speake Parrat? And
squabble? Swagger? Sweare? And discourse Fustian with
ones owne shadow? Oh thou invisible spirit of Wine, if
thou hast no name to be knowne by, let vs call thee Diuell.

+IAGO
What was he that you follow'd with your
Sword? What had he done to you?

+CASSIO
I know not.

+IAGO
Is't possible?

+CASSIO
I remember a masse of things, but nothing distinctly:
a Quarrell, but nothing wherefore. Oh, that
men should put an Enemie in their mouthes, to steale away
their Braines? that we should with ioy, pleasance, reuell
and applause, transforme our selues into Beasts.

+IAGO
Why? But you are now well enough: how came you
thus recouered?

+CASSIO
It hath pleas'd the diuell drunkennesse, to giue place
to the diuell wrath, one vnperfectnesse, shewes me another
to make me frankly despise my selfe.

+IAGO
Come, you are too seuere a Moraller. As the Time,
the Place, & the Condition of this Country stands I
could hartily wish this had not befalne: but since
it is, as it is, mend it for your owne good.

+CASSIO
I will aske him for my Place againe, he shall tell me,
I am a drunkard: had I as many mouthes as Hydra, such
an answer would stop them all. To be now a sensible
man, by and by a Foole, and presently a Beast. Oh strange!
Euery inordinate cup is vnbless'd, and the Ingredient
is a diuell.

+IAGO
Come, come: good wine, is a good famillar Creature, if
it be well vs'd: exclaime no more against it. And good
Lieutenant, I thinke, you thinke I loue you.

+CASSIO
I haue well approued it, Sir. I drunke?

+IAGO
You, or any man liuing, may be drunke at a time man.
I tell you what you shall do: Our General's Wife, is
now the Generall. I may say so, in this respect, for that
he hath deuoted, and giuen vp himselfe to the Contemplation,
marke: and deuotement of her parts and Graces.
Confesse your selfe freely to her: Importune her helpe to
put you in your place againe. She is of so free, so kinde, so
apt, so blessed a disposition, she holds it a vice in her
goodnesse, not to do more then she is requested. This
broken ioynt betweene you, and her husband, entreat her
to splinter. And my Fortunes against any lay worth
naming, this cracke of your Loue, shall grow stronger, then
it was before.

+CASSIO
You aduise me well.

+IAGO
I protest in the sinceritie of Loue, and honest
kindnesse.

+CASSIO
I thinke it freely: and betimes in the morning, I will
beseech the vertuous Desdemona to vndertake for me:
I am desperate of my Fortunes if they check me.

+IAGO
You are in the right: good night Lieutenant, I must
to the Watch.

+CASSIO
Good night, honest Iago.

+CASSIO exits

+IAGO
And what's he then, / That saies I play the Villaine?
When this aduise is free I giue, and honest,
Proball to thinking, and indeed the course
To win the Moore againe. / For 'tis most easie
Th'inclyning Desdemona to subdue
In any honest Suite. She's fram'd as fruitefull
As the free Elements. And then for her
To win the Moore, were to renownce his Baptisme,
All Seales, and Simbols of redeemed sin:
His Soule is so enfetter'd to her Loue,
That she may make, vnmake, do what she list,
Euen as her Appetite shall play the God,
With his weake Function. How am I then a Villaine,
To Counsell CASSIO to this paralell course,
Directly to his good? Diuinitie of hell,
When diuels will the blackest sinnes put on,
They do suggest at first with heauenly shewes,
As I do now. For whiles this honest Foole
Plies Desdemona, to repaire his Fortune,
And she for him, pleades strongly to the Moore,
Ile powre this pestilence into his eare:
That she repeales him, for her bodies Lust'
And by how much she striues to do him good,
She shall vndo her Credite with the Moore.
So will I turne her vertue into pitch,
And out of her owne goodnesse make the Net,
That shall en-mash them all.
SD: Enter +RODORIGO.

+IAGO
How now Rodorigo?

+RODORIGO
I do follow heere in the Chace, not like a Hound
that hunts, but one that filles vp the Crie. My Money is
almost spent; I haue bin to night exceedingly well
Cudgell'd: And I thinke the issue will bee, I shall haue so
much experience for my paines; And so, with no money
at all, and a little more Wit, returne againe to Venice.

+IAGO
How poore are they that haue not Patience?
What wound did euer heale but by degrees?
Thou know'st we worke by Wit, and not by Witchcraft
And Wit depends on dilatory time:
Dos't not go well? CASSIO hath beaten thee,
And thou by that small hurt hath casheer'd CASSIO:
Though other things grow faire against the Sun,
Yet Fruites that blossome first, will first be ripe:
Content thy selfe, a-while. In troth 'tis Morning;
Pleasure, and Action, make the houres seeme short.
Retire thee, go where thou art Billited:
Away, I say, thou shalt know more heereafter:
Nay get thee gone.

+RODORIGO exits
SD: Two things are to be done:
My Wife must moue for CASSIO to her Mistris:
Ile set her on
my selfe, a while, to draw the Moor apart,
And bring him iumpe, when he may CASSIO finde
Soliciting his wife: I, that's the way:
Dull not Deuice, by coldnesse, and delay.

+IAGO exits
Exuent MONTANO, GENT, RODORIGO

NS: Act 3 Scene 1

SD: Enter +CASSIO, +MUSITIANS, and +CLOWNE.

+CASSIO
Masters, play heere, I wil content your paines,
Something that's briefe: and bid, goodmorrow General.

+CLOWNE
Why Masters, haue your Instruments bin in
Naples, that they speake i'th'Nose thus?

+MUS
How Sir? how?

+CLOWNE
Are these I pray you, winde Instruments?

+MUS
I marry are they sir.

+CLOWNE
Oh, thereby hangs a tale.

+MUS
Whereby hangs a tale, sir?

+CLOWNE
Marry sir, by many a winde Instrument that I
know. But Masters, heere's money for you: and the
Generall so likes your Musick, that he desires you for
loues sake to make no more noise with it.

+MUS
Well Sir, we will not.

+CLOWNE
If you haue any Musicke that may not be heard,
too't againe. But (as they say) to heare Musicke, the Generall
do's not greatly care.

+MUS
We haue none such, sir.

+CLOWNE
Then put vp your Pipes in your bagge, for Ile
away. Go, vanish into ayre, away.

+MUS exits

+CASSIO
Dost thou heare me, mine honest Friend?

+CLOWNE
No, I heare not your honest Friend: / I heare you.

+CASSIO
Prythee keepe vp thy Quillets, ther's a poore peece
of Gold for thee: if the Gentlewoman that attends the
Generall be stirring, tell her, there's one Cassio
entreats her a little fauour of Speech. Wilt thou do this?

+CLOWNE
She is stirring sir: if she will stirre hither, I shall
seeme to notifie vnto her.

+CLOWNE exits
SD: Enter +IAGO.

+CASSIO
In happy time, Iago.

+IAGO
You haue not bin a-bed then?

+CASSIO
Why no: the day had broke before we parted.
I haue made bold (Iago)
to send in to your wife: / My suite to her
is, that she will to vertuous Desdemona
Procure me some accesse.

+IAGO
Ile send her to you presently:
And Ile deuise a meane to draw the Moore
Out of the way, that your conuerse and businesse
May be more free.

+CASSIO
I humbly thanke you for't.

+IAGO exits
SD: I never knew / A Florentine more kinde, and honest.
SD: Enter +AMILIA.

+AMILIA
Goodmorrow (good Lieutenant) I am sorrie
For your displeasure: but all will sure be well.
The Generall and his wife are talking of it,
And she speakes for you stoutly. The Moore replies,
That he you hurt is of great Fame in Cyprus,
And great Affinitie: and that in wholsome Wisedome
He might not but refuse you. But he protests he loues you
And needs no other Suitor, but his likings
To bring you in againe.

+CASSIO
Yet I beseech you,
If you thinke fit, or that it may be done,
Giue me aduantage of some breefe Discourse
With Desdemon alone.

+AMILIA
Pray you come in:
I will bestow you where you shall haue time
To speake your bosome freely.

+CASSIO
I am much bound to you.

NS: Act 3 Scene 2

SD: Enter +OTHELLO, +IAGO, and Gentlemen.

+OTHELLO
These Letters giue (Iago) to the Pylot,
And by him do my duties to the Senate:
That done, I will be walking on the Workes,
Repaire there to mee.

+IAGO
Well, my good Lord, Ile doo't.

+OTHELLO
This Fortification (Gentlemen) shall we see't?

+GENT
Well waite vpon your Lordship.

+OTHELLO, +IAGO, +GENT exits




NS: Act 3 Scene 3

SD: Enter +DESDEMONA, +CASSIO, and +AMILIA.
+DESDEMONA
Be thou assur'd (good Cassio) I will do
All my abilities in thy behalfe.
+AMILIA
Good Madam do: I warrant it greeues my Husband,
As if the cause were his.
+DESDEMONA
Oh that's an honest Fellow, Do not doubt Cassio
But I will haue my Lord, and you againe
As friendly as you were.
+CASSIO
Bounteous Madam,
What euer shall become of Michael Cassio,
He's neuer any thing but your true Seruant.
+DESDEMONA
I know't: I thanke you: you do loue my Lord:
You haue knowne him long, and be you well assur'd
He shall in strangenesse stand no farther off,
Then in a politique distance.
+CASSIO
I, but Lady,
That policie may either last so long,
Or feede vpon such nice and waterish diet,
Or breede it selfe so out of Circumstances,
That I being absent, and my place supply'd,
My Generall will forget my Loue, and Seruice.
+DESDEMONA
Do not doubt that: before Amilia here,
I giue thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee,
If I do vow a friendship, Ile performe it
To the last Article. My Lord shall neuer rest,
Ile watch him tame, and talke him out of patience;
His Bed shall seeme a Schoole, his Boord a Shrift,
Ile intermingle euery thing he do's
With Cassio's suite: Therefore be merry Cassio,
For thy Solicitor shall rather dye,
Then giue thy cause away.

SD: Enter +OTHELLO, and +IAGO.
+AMILIA
Madam, heere comes my Lord.
+CASSIO
Madam, Ile take my leaue.
+DESDEMONA
Why stay, and heare me speake.
+CASSIO
Madam, not now: I am very ill at ease,
Vnfit for mine owne purposes.
+DESDEMONA
Well, do your discretion.

SD: +CASSIO exits
+IAGO
Hah? I like not that.
+OTHELLO
What dost thou say?
+IAGO
Nothing my Lord; or if---I know not what.
+OTHELLO
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?
+IAGO
Cassio my Lord? No sure, I cannot thinke it
That he would steale away so guilty-like,
Seeing your comming.
+OTHELLO
I do beleeue 'twas he.
+DESDEMONA
How now my Lord?
I haue bin talking with a Suitor heere,
A man that languishes in your displeasure.
+OTHELLO
Who is't you meane?
+DESDEMONA
Why your Lieutenant Cassio: Good my Lord,
If I haue any grace, or power to moue you,
His present reconciliation take.
For if he be not one, that truly loues'you,
That erres in Ignorance, and not in Cunning,
I haue no iudgement in an honest face.
I prythee call him backe.
+OTHELLO
Went he hence now?
+DESDEMONA
I sooth; so humbled,
That he hath left part of his greefe with mee
To suffer with him. Good Loue, call him backe.
+OTHELLO
Not now (sweet Desdemon) some other time.
+DESDEMONA
But shall't be shortly?
+OTHELLO
The sooner (Sweet) for you.
+DESDEMONA
Shall't be to night, at Supper?
+OTHELLO
No, not to night.
+DESDEMONA
To morrow Dinner then?
+OTHELLO
I shall not dine at home:
I meete the Captaines at the Cittadell.
+DESDEMONA
Why then to morrow night, on Tuesday morne,
On Tuesday noone, or night; on Wensday Morne.
I prythee name the time, but let it not
Exceed three dayes. Infaith hee's penitent:
And yet his Trespasse, in our common reason
(Saue that they say the warres must make example)
Out of her best, is not almost a fault
T'encurre a priuate checke. When shall he come?
Tell me Othello. I wonder in my Soule
What you would aske me, that I should deny,
Or stand so mam'ring on? What? Michael Cassio,
That came a woing wirh you? and so many a time
(When I haue spoke of you dispraisingly)
Hath tane your part, to haue so much to do
To bring him in? Trust me, I could do much.
+OTHELLO
Prythee no more: Let him come when he will:
I will deny thee nothing.
+DESDEMONA
Why, this is not a Boone:
'Tis as I should entreate you weare your Gloues,
Or feede on nourishing dishes, or keepe you warme,
Or sue to you, to do a peculiar profit
To your owne person. Nay, when I haue a suite
Wherein I meane to touch your Loue indeed,
It shall be full of poize, and difficult waight,
And fearefull to be granted.
+OTHELLO
I will deny thee nothing.
Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
To leaue me but a little to my selfe.
+DESDEMONA
Shall I deny you? No: farewell my Lord.
+OTHELLO
Farewell my Desdemona, Ile come to thee strait.
+DESDEMONA
Amilia come; be as your Fancies teach you:
What ere you be, I am obedient.

SD: +DESDEMONA exits
+OTHELLO
Excellent wretch: Perdition catch my Soule
But I do loue thee: and when I loue thee not,
Chaos is come againe.
+IAGO
My Noble Lord.
+OTHELLO
What dost thou say, Iago?
+IAGO
Did Michael Cassio
When he woo'd my Lady, know of your loue?
+OTHELLO
He did, from first to last: / Why dost thou aske?
+IAGO
But for a satisfaction of my Thought,
No further harme.
+OTHELLO
Why of thy thought, Iago?
+IAGO
I did not thinke he had bin acquainted with hir.
+OTHELLO
O yes, and went betweene vs very oft.
+IAGO
Indeed?
+OTHELLO
Indeed? I indeed. Discern'st thou ought in that?
Is he not honest?
+IAGO
Honest, my Lord?
+OTHELLO
Honest? I, Honest.
+IAGO
My Lord, for ought I know.
+OTHELLO
What do'st thou thinke?
+IAGO
Thinke, my Lord?
+OTHELLO
Thinke, my Lord? Alas, thou ecchos't me;
As if there were some Monster in thy thought
Too hideous to be shewne. Thou dost mean somthing:
I heard thee say euen now, thou lik'st not that,
When Cassio left my wife. What didd'st not like?
And when I told thee, he was of my Counsaile,
Of my whole course of wooing; thou cried'st, Indeede?
And didd'st contract, and purse thy brow together,
As if thou then hadd'st shut vp in thy Braine
Some horrible Conceite. If thou do'st loue me,
Shew me thy thought.
+IAGO
My Lord, you know I loue you.
+OTHELLO
I thinke thou do'st:
And for I know thou'rt full of Loue, and Honestie,
And weigh'st thy words before thou giu'st them breath,
Therefore these stops of thine, fright me the more:
For such things in a false disloyall Knaue
Are trickes of Custome: but in a man that's iust,
They're close dilations, working from the heart,
That Passion cannot rule.
+IAGO
For Michael Cassio,
I dare be sworne, I thinke that he is honest.
+OTHELLO
I thinke so too.
+IAGO
Men should be what they seeme,
Or those that be not, would they might seeme none.
+OTHELLO
Certaine, men should be what they seeme.
+IAGO
Why then I thinke Cassio's an honest man.
+OTHELLO
Nay, yet there's more in this?
I prythee speake to me, as to thy thinkings,
As thou dost ruminate, and giue thy worst of thoughts
The worst of words.
+IAGO
Good my Lord pardon me,
Though I am bound to euery Acte of dutie,
I am not bound to that: All Slaues are free:
Vtter my Thoughts? Why say, they are vild, and falce?
As where's that Palace, whereinto foule things
Sometimes intrude not? Who ha's that breast so pure,
Wherein vncleanly Apprehensions
Keepe Leetes, and Law-dayes, and in Sessions sit
With meditations lawfull?
+OTHELLO
Thou do'st conspire against thy Friend (Iago)
If thou but think'st him wrong'd, and mak'st his eare
A stranger to thy Thoughts.
+IAGO
I do beseech you,
Though I perchance am vicious in my guesse
(As I confesse it is my Natures plague
To spy into Abuses, and of my iealousie
Shapes faults that are not) that your wisedome
From one, that so imperfectly conceits,
Would take no notice, nor build your selfe a trouble
Out of his scattering, and vnsure obseruance:
It were not for your quiet, nor your good,
Nor for my Manhood, Honesty, and Wisedome,
To let you know my thoughts.
+OTHELLO
What dost thou meane?
+IAGO
Good name in Man, & woman (deere my Lord)
Is the immediate Iewell of their Soules;
Who steales my purse, steales trash: / 'Tis something, nothing;
'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has bin slaue to thousands:
But he that filches from me my good Name,
Robs me of that, which not enriches him,
And makes me poore indeed.
+OTHELLO
Ile know thy Thoughts.
+IAGO
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,
Nor shall not, whil'st 'tis in my custodie.
+OTHELLO
Ha?
+IAGO
Oh, beware my Lord, of iealousie,
It is the greene-ey'd Monster, which doth mocke
The meate it feeds on. That Cuckold liues in blisse,
Who certaine ofhis Fate, loues not his wronger:
But oh, what damned minutes tels he ore,
Who dotes, yet doubts: Suspects, yet soundly loues?
+OTHELLO
O miserie.
+IAGO
Poore, and Content, is rich, and rich enough,
But Riches finelesse, is as poore as Winter,
To him that euer feares he shall be poore:
Good Heauen, the Soules of all my Tribe defend
From Iealousie.
+OTHELLO
Why? why is this?
Think'st thou, I'ld make a Life of Iealousie;
To follow still the changes of the Moone
With fresh suspitions? No: to be once in doubt,
Is to be resolu'd: Exchange me for a Goat,
When I shall turne the businesse of my Soule
To such exufflicate, and blow'd Surmises,
Matching thy inference. 'Tis not to make me Iealious,
To say my wife is faire, feeds well, loues company,
Is free of Speech, Sings, Playes, and Dances:
Where Vertue is, these are more vertuous.
Nor from mine owne weake merites, will I draw
The smallest feare, or doubt ofher reuolt,
For she had eyes, and chose me. No Iago,
Ile see before I doubt; when I doubt, proue;
And on the proofe, there is no more but this,
Away at once with Loue, or Iealousie.
+IAGO
I am glad of this: For now I shall haue reason
To shew the Loue and Duty that I beare you
With franker spirit. Therefore (as I am bound)
Receiue it from me. I speake not yet of proofe:
Looke to your wife, obserue her well with Cassio,
Weare your eyes, thus: not Iealious, nor Secure:
I would not haue your free, and Noble Nature,
Out of selfe-Bounty, be abus'd: Looke too't:
I know our Country disposition well:
In Venice, they do let Heauen see the prankes
They dare not shew their Husbands. / Their best Conscience,
Is not to leaue't vndone, but kept vnknowne.
+OTHELLO
Dost thou say so?
+IAGO
She did deceiue her Father, marrying you,
And when she seem'd to shake, and feare your lookes,
She lou'd them most.
+OTHELLO
And so she did.
+IAGO
Why go too then:
Shee that so young could giue out such a Seeming
To seele her Fathers eyes vp, close as Oake,
He thought 'twas Witchcraft. / But I am much too blame:
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
For too much louing you.
+OTHELLO
I am bound to thee for euer.
+IAGO
I see this hath a little dash'd your Spirits:
+OTHELLO
Not a iot, not a iot.
+IAGO
Trust me, I feare it has:
I hope you will consider what is spoke
Comes from your Loue. / But I do see y'are moou'd:
I am to pray you, not to straine my speech
To grosser issues, nor to larger reach,
Then to Suspition.
+OTHELLO
I will not.
+IAGO
Should you do so (my Lord)
My speech should fall into such vilde successe,
Which my Thoughts aym'd not. / Cassio's my worthy Friend:
My Lord, I see y'are mou'd.
+OTHELLO
No, not much mou'd:
I do not thinke but Desdemona's honest.
+IAGO
Long liue she so; / And long liue you to thinke so.
+OTHELLO
And yet how Nature erring from it selfe.
+IAGO
I, there's the point: / As (to be bold with you)
Not to affect many proposed Matches
Of her owne Clime, Complexion, and Degree,
Whereto we see in all things, Nature tends:
Foh, one may smel in such, a will most ranke,
Foule disproportions, Thoughts vnnaturall.
But (pardon me) I do not in position
Distinctly speake of her, though I may feare
Her will, recoyling to her better iudgement,
May fal to match you with her Country formes,
And happily repent.
+OTHELLO
Farewell, farewell:
If more thou dost perceiue, let me know more:
Set on thy wife to obserue. / Leaue me Iago.
+IAGO
My Lord, I take my leaue.
+OTHELLO
Why did I marry? / This honest Creature (doubtlesse)
Sees, and knowes more, much more then he vnfolds.
+IAGO
My Lord, I would I might intreat your Honor
To scan this thing no farther: Leaue it to time,
Although 'tis fit that Cassio haue his Place;
For sure he filles it vp with great Ability;
Yet if you please, to him off a-while:
You shall by that perceiue him, and his meanes:
Note if your Lady straine his Encertainment
With any strong, or vehement importunitie,
Much will be seene in that: In the meane time,
Let me be thought too busie in my feares,
(As worthy cause I haue to feare I am)
And hold her free, I do beseech your Honor.
+OTHELLO
Feare not my gouernment.
+IAGO
I once more take my leaue.

SD: +IAGO exits
+OTHELLO
This Fellow's of exceeding honesty,
And knowes all Quantities with a learn'd Spirit
Of humane dealings. If I do proue her Haggard,
Though that her Iesses were my deere heart-strings,
I'ld whistle her off, and let her downe the winde
To prey at Fortune. Haply, for I am blacke,
And haue not those soft parts of Conuersation
That Chamberers haue: Or for I am declin'd
Into the vale of yeares (yet that's not much)
Shee's gone. I am abus'd, and my releefe
Must be to loath her. Oh Curse of Marriage!
That we can call these delicate Creatures ours,
And not their Appetites? I had rather be a Toad,
And liue vpon the vapour of a Dungeon,
Then keepe a corner in the thing I loue
For others vses. Yet 'tis the plague to Great-ones,
Prerogatiu'd are they lesse then the Base,
'Tis destiny vnshunnable, like death:
Euen then, this forked plague is Fated to vs,
When we do quicken. Looke where she comes:

SD: Enter +DESDEMONA and +AMILIA.
+OTHELLO
If she be false, Heauen mock'd it selfe:
Ile not beleeue't.
+DESDEMONA
How now, my deere Othello?
Your dinner, and the generous Islanders
By you inuited, do attend your presence.
+OTHELLO
I am too blame.
+DESDEMONA
Why do you speake so faintly?
Are you not well?
+OTHELLO
I haue a paine vpon my Forehead, heere.
+DESDEMONA
Why that's with watching, 'twill away againe.
Let me but binde it hard, within this houre
It will be well.
+OTHELLO
Your Napkin is too little:
Let it alone: Come, Ile go in with you.
+DESDEMONA
I am very sorry that you are not well.

SD: +OTHELLO exits
+AMILIA
I am glad I haue found this Napkin:
This was her first remembrance from the Moore,
My wayward Husband hath a hundred times
Woo'd me to steale it. But she so loues the Token,
(For he coniur'd her, she should euer keepe it)
That she reserues it euermore about her,
To kisse, and talke too. Ile haue the worke tane out,
And giu't Iago:
what he will do with it / Heauen knowes, not I:
I nothing, but to please his Fantasie.

SD: Enter +IAGO.
+IAGO
How now? What do you heere alone?
+AMILIA
Do not you chide: I haue a thing for you.
+IAGO
You haue a thing for me? / It is a common thing---
+AMILIA
Hah?
+IAGO
To haue a foolish wife.
+AMILIA
Oh, is that all? What will you giue me now
For that same Handkerchiefe.
+IAGO
What Handkerchiefe?
+AMILIA
What Handkerchiefe?
Why that the Moore first gaue to Desdemona,
That which so often you did bid me steale.
+IAGO
Hast stolne it from her?
+AMILIA
No: but she let it drop by negligence,
And to th'aduantage, I being heere, took't vp:
Looke, heere 'tis.
+IAGO
A good wench, giue it me.
+AMILIA
What will you do with't, that you haue bene so earnest
to haue me filch it?
+IAGO
Why, what is that to you?
+AMILIA
If it be not for some purpose of import,
Giu't me againe. Poore Lady, shee'l run mad
When she shall lacke it.
+IAGO
Be not acknowne on't: / I haue vse for it.

SD: +AMILIA exits
+IAGO
I will in Cassio's Lodging loose this Napkin,
And let him finde it. Trifles light as ayre,
Are to the iealious, confirmations strong,
As proofes of holy Writ. This may do something.
The Moore already changes with my poyson:
Dangerous conceites, are in their Natures poysons,
Which at the first are scarse found to distaste:
But with a little acte vpon the blood,
Burne like the Mines of Sulphure

SD: Enter +OTHELLO.
+IAGO
I did say so.
Looke where he comes: Not Poppy, nor Mandragora,
Nor all the drowsie Syrrups of the world
Shall euer medicine thee to that sweete sleepe
Which thou owd'st yesterday.
+OTHELLO
Ha, ha, false to mee?
+IAGO
Why how now Generall? No more of that.
+OTHELLO
Auant, be gone: Thou hast set me on the Racke:
I sweare 'tis better to be much abus'd,
Then but to know't a little.
+IAGO
How now, my Lord?
+OTHELLO
What sense had I, in her stolne houres of Lust?
I saw't not, thought it not: it harm'd not me:
I slept the next night well, fed well, was free, and merrie.
I found not Cassio's kisses on her Lippes:
He that is robb'd, not wanting what is stolne,
Let him not know't, and he's not robb'd at all.
+IAGO
I am sorry to heare this?
+OTHELLO
I had beene happy, if the generall Campe,
Pyoners and all, had tasted her sweet Body,
So I had nothing knowne. Oh now, for euer
Farewell the Tranquill minde; farewell Content;
Farewell the plumed Troopes, and the bigge Warres,
That makes Ambition, Vertue! Oh farewell;
Farewell the neighing Steed, and the shrill Trumpe,
The Spirit-stirring Drum, th'Eare-piercing Fife,
The Royall Banner, and all Qualitie,
Pride, Pompe, and Circumstance of glorious Warre:
And O you mortall Engines, whose rude throates
Th'immortall Ioues dread Clamours, counterfet,
Farewell: Othello's Occupation's gone.
+IAGO
Is't possible my Lord?
+OTHELLO
Villaine, be sure thou proue my Loue a Whore;
Be sure of it: Giue me the Occular proofe,
Or by the worth of mine eternall Soule,
Thou had'st bin better haue bin borne a Dog
Then answer my wak'd wrath.
+IAGO
Is't come to this?
+OTHELLO
Make me to see't: or (at the least) so proue it,
That the probation beare no Hindge, nor Loope,
To hang a doubt on: Or woe vpon thy life.
+IAGO
My Noble Lord.
+OTHELLO
If thou dost slander her, and torture me,
Neuer pray more: Abandon all remorse
On Horrors head, Horrors accumulate:
Do deeds to make Heauen weepe, all Earth amaz'd;
For nothing canst thou to damnation adde,
Greater then that.
+IAGO
O Grace! O Heauen forgiue me!
Are you a Man? Haue you a Soule? or Sense?
God buy you: take mine Office. Oh wretched Foole,
That lou'st to make thine Honesty, a Vice!
Oh monstrous world! Take note, take note (O World)
To be direct and honest, is not safe.
I thanke you for this profit, and from hence
Ile loue no Friend, sith Loue breeds such offence.
+OTHELLO
Nay stay: thou should'st be honest.
+IAGO
I should be wise; for Honestie's a Foole,
And looses that it workes for.
+OTHELLO
By the World,
I thinke my Wife be honest, and thinke she is not:
I thinke that thou art iust, and thinke thou art not:
Ile haue some proofe. My name that was as fresh
As Dians Visage, is now begrim'd and blacke
As mine owne face. If there be Cords, or Kniues,
Poyson, or Fire, or suffocating streames,
Ile not indure it. Would I were satisfied.
+IAGO
I see you are eaten vp with Passion:
I do repent me, that I put it to you.
You would be satisfied?
+OTHELLO
Would? Nay, and I will.
+IAGO
And may: but how? How satisfied, my Lord?
Would you the super-vision grossely gape on?
Behold her top'd?
+OTHELLO
Death, and damnation. Oh!
+IAGO
It were a tedious difficulty, I thinke,
To bring them to that Prospect: Damne them then,
If euer mortall eyes do see them boulster
More then their owne. What then? How then?
What shall I say? Where's Satisfaction?
It is impossible you should see this,
Were they as prime as Goates, as hot as Monkeyes,
As salt as Wolues in pride, and Fooles as grosse
As Ignorance, made drunke. But yet, I say,
If imputation, and strong circumstances,
Which leade directly to the doore of Truth,
Will giue you satisfaction, you might haue't.
+OTHELLO
Giue me a liuing reason she's disloyall.
+IAGO
I do not like the Office.
But sith I am entred in this cause so farre
(Prick'd too't by foolish Honesty, and Loue)
I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately,
And being troubled with a raging tooth,
I could not sleepe.
There are a kinde of men, / So loose of Soule,
that in their sleepes will mutter / Their Affayres:
one of this kinde is Cassio:
In sleepe I heard him say, sweet Desdemona,
Let vs be wary, let vs hide our Loues,
And then (Sir) would he gripe, and wring my hand:
Cry, oh sweet Creature: then kisse me hard,
As if he pluckt vp kisses by the rootes,
That grew vpon my lippes, laid his Leg ore my Thigh,
And sigh, and kisse, and then cry cursed Fate,
That gaue thee to the Moore.
+OTHELLO
O monstrous! monstrous!
+IAGO
Nay, this was but his Dreame.
+OTHELLO
But this denoted a fore-gone conclusion,
+IAGO
'Tis a shrew'd doubt, though it be but a Dreame.
And this may helpe to thicken other proofes,
That do demonstrate thinly.
+OTHELLO
Ile teare her all to peeces.
+IAGO
Nay yet be wise; yet we see nothing done,
She may be honest yet: Tell me but this,
Haue you not sometimes seene a Handkerchiefe
Spotted with Strawberries, in your wiues hand?
+OTHELLO
I gaue her such a one: 'twas my first gift.
+IAGO
I know not that: but such a Handkerchiefe
(I am sure it was your wiues) did I to day
See Cassio wipe his Beard with.
+OTHELLO
If it be that.
+IAGO
If it be that, or any, it was hers.
It speakes against her with the other proofes.
+OTHELLO
O that the Slaue had forty thousand liues:
One is too poore, too weake for my reuenge.
Now do I see 'tis true. Looke heere Iago,
All my fond loue thus do I blow to Heauen.
'Tis gone,
Arise blacke vengeance, from the hollow hell,
Yeeld vp (O Loue) thy Crowne, and hearted Throne
To tyrannous Hate. Swell bosome with thy fraught,
For 'tis of Aspickes tongues.
+IAGO
Yet be content.
+OTHELLO
Oh blood, blood, blood.
+IAGO
Patience I say: your minde may change.
+OTHELLO
Neuer Iago. Like to the Ponticke Sea,
Whose Icie Current, and compulsiue course,
Neu'r keepes retyring ebbe, but keepes due on
To the Proponticke, and the Hellespont:
Euen so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace
Shall neu'r looke backe, neu'r ebbe to humble Loue,
Till that a capeable, and wide Reuenge
Swallow them vp. Now by yond Marble Heauen,
In the due reuerence of a Sacred vow,
I heere engage my words.
+IAGO
Do not rise yet:
Witnesse you euer-burning Lights aboue,
You Elements, that clip vs round about,
Witnesse that heere Iago doth giue vp
The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
To wrong'd Othello's Seruice. Let him command,
And to obey shall be in me remorse,
What bloody businesse euer.
+OTHELLO
I greet thy loue,
Not with vaine thanks, but with acceptance bounteous,
And will vpon the instant put thee too't.
Within these three dayes let me heare thee say,
That Cassio's not aliue.
+IAGO
My Friend is dead:
'Tis done at your Request. / But let her liue.
+OTHELLO
Damne her lewde Minx: / O damne her, damne her.
Come go with me a-part, I will withdraw
To furnish me with some swift meanes of death
For the faire Diuell. / Now art thou my Lieutenant.
+IAGO
I am your owne for euer.

SD: Exeunt +OTHELLO, +IAGO




NS: Act 3 Scene 4

SD: Enter +DESDEMONA, +AMILIA, and +CLOWN.

+DESDEMONA
Do you know Sirrah, where Lieutenant
Cassio lyes?

+CLOWN
I dare not say he lies any where.

+DESDEMONA
Why man?

+CLOWN
He's a Soldier, and for me to say a Souldier lyes, 'tis
stabbing.

+DESDEMONA
Go too: where lodges he?

+CLOWN
To tell you where he lodges, is to tel you where I
lye.

+DESDEMONA
Can any thing be made of this?

+CLOWN
I know not where he lodges, and for mee to deuise a
lodging, and say he lies heere, or he lies there, were to lye
in mine owne throat.

+DESDEMONA
Can you enquire him out? and be edified by
report?

+CLOWN
I will Catechize the world for him, that is, make
Questions, and by them answer.

+DESDEMONA
Seeke him, bidde him come hither: tell him, I
haue moou'd my Lord on his behalfe, and hope all will be
well.

+CLOWN
To do this, is within the compasse of mans Wit, and
therefore I will attempt the doing it.
+CLOWN exits

+DESDEMONA
Where should I loose the Handkerchiefe, Amilia?

+AMIL
I know not Madam.

+DESDEMONA
Beleeue me, I had rather haue lost my purse
Full of Cruzadoes. And but my Noble Moore
Is true of minde, and made of no such basenesse,
As iealious Creatures are, it were enough
To put him to ill-thinking.

+AMIL
Is he not iealious?

+DESDEMONA
Who, he? I thinke the Sun where he was borne,
Drew all such humors from him.

+AMIL
Looke where he comes.

SD: Enter +OTHELLO.

+DESDEMONA
I will not leaue him now, till Cassio
be / Call'd to him. How is't with you, my Lord?

+OTHELLO
Well my good Lady. Oh hardnes to dissemble!
How do you, Desdemona?

+DESDEMONA
Well, my good Lord.

+OTHELLO
Giue me your hand. / This hand is moist, my Lady.

+DESDEMONA
It hath felt no age, nor knowne no sorrow.

+OTHELLO
This argues fruitfulnesse, and liberall heart:
Hot, hot, and moyst. This hand of yours requires
A sequester from Liberty: Fasting, and Prayer,
Much Castigation, Exercise deuout,
For heere's a yong, and sweating Diuell heere
That commonly rebels: 'Tis a good hand,
A franke one.

+DESDEMONA
You may (indeed) say so:
For 'twas that hand that gaue away my heart.

+OTHELLO
A liberall hand. The hearts of old, gaue hands:
But our new Heraldry is hands, not hearts.

+DESDEMONA
I cannot speake of this: / Come, now your promise.

+OTHELLO
What promise, Chucke?

+DESDEMONA
I haue sent to bid Cassio come speake with you.

+OTHELLO
I haue a salt and sorry Rhewme offends me:
Lend me thy Handkerchiefe.

+DESDEMONA
Heere my Lord.

+OTHELLO
That which I gaue you.

+DESDEMONA
I haue it not about me.

+OTHELLO
Not?

+DESDEMONA
No indeed, my Lord.

+OTHELLO
That's a fault:
That Handkerchiefe
Did an Agyptian to my Mother giue:
She was a Charmer, and could almost read
The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept it,
'T would make her Amiable, and subdue my Father
Intirely to her loue: But if she lost it,
Or made a Guift of it, my Fathers eye
Should hold her loathed, and his Spirits should hunt
After new Fancies. She dying, gaue it me,
And bid me (when my Fate would haue me Wiu'd)
To giue it her. I did so; and take heede on't,
Make it a Darling, like your precious eye:
To loose't, or giue't away, were such perdition,
As nothing else could match.

+DES,
Is't possible?

+OTHELLO
'Tis true: There's Magicke in the web of it:
A Sybill that had numbred in the world
The Sun to course, two hundred compasses,
In her Prophetticke furie sow'd the Worke:
The Wormes were hallowed, that did breede the Silke,
And it was dyde in Mummey, which the Skilfull
Conseru'd of Maidens hearts.

+DESDEMONA
Indeed? Is't true?

+OTHELLO
Most veritable, therefore looke too't well.

+DESDEMONA
Then would to Heauen, that I had neuer seene't?

+OTHELLO
Ha? wherefore?

+DESDEMONA
Why do you speake so startingly, and rash?

+OTHELLO
Is't lost? Is't gon? Speak, is't out o'th'way?

+DESDEMONA
Blesse vs.

+OTHELLO
Say you?

+DESDEMONA
It is not lost:
but what and if it were?

+OTHELLO
How?

+DESDEMONA
I say it is not lost.

+OTHELLO
Fetcht, let me see't.

+DESDEMONA
Why so I can: but I will not now:
This is a tricke to put me from my suite,
Pray you let Cassio be receiu'd againe.

+OTHELLO
Fetch me the Handkerchiefe, / My minde mis-giues.

+DESDEMONA
Come, come:
you'l neuer meete a more sufficient man.

+OTHELLO
The Handkerchiefe.

+DESDEMONA
A man that all his time
Hath founded his good Fortunes on your loue;
Shar'd dangers with you.

+OTHELLO
The Handkerchiefe.

+DESDEMONA
Insooth, you are too blame.

+OTHELLO
Away.
+OTHELLO exits

+AMIL
Is not this man iealious?

+DESDEMONA
I neu'r saw this before.
Sure, there's some wonder in this Handkerchikfe,
I am most vnhappy in the losse of it.

+AMIL
'Tis not a yeare or two shewes vs a man:
They are all but Stomackes, and we all but Food,
They eate vs hungerly, and when they are full
They belch vs. / Looke you, Cassio and my Husband.

SD: Enter +IAGO, and +CASSIO.

+IAGO
There is no other way: 'tis she must doo't:
And loe the happinesse: go, and importune her.

+DESDEMONA
How now (good Cassio) what's the newes with you?

+CASSIO
Madam, my former suite. I do beseech you,
That by your vertuous meanes, I may againe
Exist, and be a member of his loue,
Whom I, with all the Office of my heart
Intirely honour, I would not be delayd.
If my offence, be of such mortall kinde,
That nor my Seruice past, nor present Sorrowes,
Nor purpos'd merit in futurity,
Can ransome me into his loue againe,
But to know so, must be my benefit:
So shall I cloath me in a forc'd content,
And shut my selfe vp in some other course
To Fortunes Almes.

+DESDEMONA
Alas (thrice-gentle Cassio)
My Aduocation is not now in Tune;
My Lord, is not my Lord; nor should I know him,
Were he in Fauour, as in Humour alter'd.
So helpe me euery spirit sanctified,
As I haue spoken for you all my best,
And stood within the blanke of his displeasure
For my free speech. You must awhile be patient:
What I can do, I will: and more I will
Then for my selfe, I dare. Let that suffice you.

+IAGO
Is my Lord angry?

+AMIL
He went hence but now:
And certainly in strange vnquietnesse.

+IAGO
Can he be angry? I haue seene the Cannon
When it hath blowne his Rankes into the Ayre,
And like the Diuell from his very Arme
Puff't his owne Brother: And is he angry?
Something of moment then: I will go meet him,
There's matter in't indeed, if he be angry.

+DESDEMONA
I prythee do so.
+IAGO exits
SD: +DESDEMONA exits
Something sure of State,
Either from Venice, or some vnhatch'd practise
Made demonstrable heere in Cyprus, to him,
Hath pudled his cleare Spirit: and in such cases,
Mens Natures wrangle with inferiour things,
Though great ones are their obiect. 'Tis euen so.
For let our finger ake, and it endues
Our other healthfull members, euen to a sense
Of paine. Nay, we must thinke men are not Gods,
Nor of them looke for such obseruancie
As fits the Bridall. Beshrew me much, Amilia,
I was (vnhandsome Warrior, as I am)
Arraigning his vnkindnesse with my soule:
But now I finde, I had suborn'd the Witnesse,
And he's Indited falsely.

+AMIL
Pray heauen it bee / State matters, as you thinke,
and no Conception, / Nor no Iealious Toy,
concerning you.

+DESDEMONA
Alas the day, I neuer gaue him cause.

+AMIL
But Iealious soules will not be answer'd so;
They are not euer iealious for the cause,
But iealious, for they're iealious. It is a Monster
Begot vpon it selfe, borne on it selfe.

+DESDEMONA
Heauen keepe the Monster from Othello's mind.

+AMIL
Lady, Amen.

+DESDEMONA
I will go seeke him. Cassio, walke heere about:
If I doe finde him fit, Ile moue your suite,
And seeke to effect it to my vttermost.

+CAS.
I humbly thanke your Ladyship.
+DESDEMONA exits

SD: Enter +BIANCA.

+BIANCA
'Saue you (Friend Cassio.)

+CASSIO
What make you from home?
How is't with you, my most faire Bianca?
Indeed (sweet Loue) I was comming to your house.

+BIANCA
And I was going to your Lodging, Cassio.
What? keepe a weeke away? Seuen dayes, and Nights?
Eight score eight houres? And Louers absent howres
More tedious then the Diall, eight score times?
Oh weary reck'ning.

+CASSIO
Pardon me, Bianca:
I haue this while with leaden thoughts beene prest,
But I shall in a more continuate time
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca
Take me this worke out.

+BIANCA
Oh Cassio, whence came this?
This is some Token from a newer Friend,
To the felt-Absence: now I feele a Cause:
Is't come to this? Well, well.

+CASSIO
Go too, woman:
Throw your vilde gesses in the Diuels teeth,
From whence you haue them. You are iealious now,
That this is from some Mistris, some remembrance;
No, in good troth Bianca.

+BIANCA
Why, who's is it?

+CASSIO
I know not neither: / I found it in my Chamber,
I like the worke well; Ere it be demanded
(As like enough it will) I would haue it coppied:
Take it, and doo't, and leaue me for this time.

+BIANCA
Leaue you? Wherefore?

+CASSIO
I do attend heere on the Generall,
And thinke it no addition nor my wish
To haue him see me woman'd.

+BIANCA
Why, I ptay you?

+CASSIO
Not that I loue you not.

+BIANCA
But that you do not loue me.
I pray you bring me on the way a little,
And say, if I shall see you soone at night?

+CASSIO
'Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
For I attend heere: But Ile see you soone.

+BIANCA
'Tis very good: I must be circumstanc'd.
SD: Exuent +AMIL, +CASSIO, +BIANCA

NS: Act 4, scene 1

SD: Enter +OTHELLO, and +IAGO.

+IAGO
Will you thinke so?

+OTHELLO
Thinke so, Iago?

+IAGO
What,
to kisse in priuate?

+OTHELLO
An vnauthoriz'd kisse?

+IAGO
Or to be naked with her Friend in bed,
An houre, or more, not meaning any harme?

+OTHELLO
Naked in bed (Iago) and not meane harme?
It is hypocrisie against the Diuell:
They that meane vertuously, and yet do so,
The Diuell their vertue tempts, and they tempt Heauen.

+IAGO
If they do nothing, 'tis a Veniall slip:
But if I giue my wife a Handkerchiefe.

+OTHELLO
What then?

+IAGO
Why then 'tis hers (my Lord) and being hers,
She may (I thinke) bestow't on any man.

+OTHELLO
She is Protectresse of her honor too:
May she giue that?

+IAGO
Her honor is an Essence that's not seene,
They haue it very oft, that haue it not.
But for the Handkerchiefe.

+OTHELLO
By heauen, I would most gladly haue forgot it:
Thou saidst (oh, it comes ore my memorie,
As doth the Rauen o're the infectious house:
Boading to all) he had my Handkerchiefe.

+IAGO
I: what of that?

+OTHELLO
That's not so good now.

+IAG
What
if I had said, I had seene him do you wrong?
Or heard him say (as Knaues be such abroad,
Who hauing by their owne importunate suit,
Or voluntary dotage of some Mistris,
Conuinced or supply'd them, cannot chuse
But they must blab.)

+OTHELLO
Hath he said any thing?

+IAGO
He hath (my Lord) but be you well assur'd,
No more then he'le vn-sweare.

+OTHELLO
What hath he said?

+IAGO
Why, that he did: I know not what he did.

+OTHELLO
What? What?

+IAGO
Lye.

+OTHELLO
With her?

+IAGO
With her? On her: what you will.

+OTHELLO
Lye with her? lye on her? We say lye on her,
when they be-lye-her. Lye with her: that's fullsome:
Handkerchiefe: Confessions: Handkerchiefe. To
confesse, and be hang'd for his labour. First, to be hang'd,
and then to confesse: I tremble at it. Nature would not
inuest her selfe in such shadowing passion, without some
Iustruction. It is not words that shakes me thus, (pish)
Noses, Eares, and Lippes: is't possible. Confesse?
Handkerchiefe? O diuell.

SD: +OTHELLO Falls in a Traunce.

+IAGO
Worke on,
My Medicine workes. Thus credulous Fooles are caught,
And many worthy, and chast Dames euen thus,
(All guiltlesse) meete reproach: what hoa? My Lord?
My Lord, I say: Othello.

SD: Enter +CASSIO.

+CASSIO
What's the matter?

+IAGO
My Lord is falne into an Epilepsie,
This is his second Fit: he had one yesterday.

+CASSIO
Rub him about the Temples.

+IAGO
The Lethargie must haue his quyet course:
If not, he foames at mouth: and by and by
Breakes out to sauage madnesse. Looke, he stirres:
Do you withdraw your selfe a little while,
He will recouer straight: when he is gone,
I would on great occasion, speake with you.
How is it Generall? Haue you not hurt your head?

+OTHELLO
Dost thou mocke me?

+IAGO
I mocke you not, by Heauen:
Would you would beare your Fortune like a Man.

+OTHELLO
A Horned man's a Monster, and a Beast.

+IAGO
Ther's many a Beast then in a populous Citty,
And many a ciuill Monster.

+OTHELLO
Did he confesse it?

+IAGO
Good Sir, be a man:
Thinke euery bearded fellow that's but yoak'd
May draw with you. There's Millions now aliue,
That nightly lye in those vnproper beds,
Which they dare sweare peculiar. Your case is better.
Oh, 'tis the spight of hell, the Fiends Arch-mock,
To lip a wanton in a secure Cowch;
And to suppose her chast. No, let me know,
And knowing what I am, I know what she shallbe.

+OTHELLO
Oh, thou art wise: 'tis certaine.

+IAGO
Stand you a while apart,
Confine your selfe but in a patient List,
Whil'st you were heere, o're-whelmed with your griefe
(A passion most resulting such a man)
Cassio came hither. I shifted him away,
And layd good scuses vpon your Extasie,
Bad him anon returne: and heere speake with me,
The which he promis'd. Do but encaue your selfe,
And marke the Fleeres, the Gybes, and notable Scornes
That dwell in euery Region of his face.
For I will make him tell the Tale anew;
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
He hath, and is againe to cope your wife.
I say, but marke his gesture: marry Patience,
Or I shall say y'are all in all in Spleene,
And nothing of a man.

+OTHELLO
Do'st thou heare, Iago,
I will be found most cunning in my Patience:
But (do'st thou heare) most bloody.

+IAGO
That's not amisse,
But yet keepe time in all: will you withdraw?
SD: +OTHELLO exits
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
A Huswife that by selling her desires
Buyes her selfe Bread, and Cloath. It is a Creature
That dotes on Cassio, (as 'tis the Strumpets plague
To be-guile many, and be be-guil'd by one)
He, when he heares of her, cannot restraine
From the excesse of Laughter. Heere he comes.

SD: Enter +CASSIO.

+IAGO
As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad:
And his vnbookish Ielousie must conserue
Poore Cassio's smiles, gestures, and light behauiours
Quite in the wrong. How do you Lieutenant?

+CAS.
The worser, that you giue me the addition,
Whose want euen killes me.

+IAGO
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on't:
Now, if this Suit lay in Bianca's dowre,
How quickely should you speed?

+CAS.
Alas poore Caitiffe.

SD: +OTHELLO Looke how he laughes already.

+IAGO
I neuer knew woman loue man so.

+CAS.
Alas poore Rogue, I thinke indeed she loues me.

SD: +OTHELLO Now he denies it faintly: and laughes it out.

+IAGO
Do you heare Cassio?

SD: +OTHELLO Now he importunes him / To tell it o're:
go too, well said, well said.

+IAGO
She giues it out, that you shall marry her.
Do you intend it?

+CAS.
Ha, ha, ha.

SD: +OTHELLO Do ye triumph, Romaine? do you triumph?

+CAS.
I marry. What? A customer; prythee beare / Some
Charitie to my wit, do not thinke it / So vnwholesome. Ha,
ha, ha.

SD: +OTHELLO So, so, so, so: they laugh, that winnes.

+IAGO
Why the cry goes, that you marry her.

+CAS.
Prythee say true.

+IAGO
I am a very Villaine else.

SD: +OTHELLO Haue you scoar'd me? Well.

+CAS.
This is the Monkeys owne giuing out: / She is
perswaded I will marry her / Out of her owne loue &
flattery, not out of my promise.

SD: +OTHELLO Iago becomes me: now he begins the
story.

+CASSIO
She was heere euen now: she haunts me in euery
place. I was the other day talking on the Sea-banke with
certaine Venetians, and thither comes the Bauble, and
falls me thus about my neck.

SD: +OTHELLO Crying oh deere Cassio, as it were: his
iesture imports it.

+CASSIO
So hangs, and lolls, and weepes vpon me: / So shakes,
and pulls me. Ha, ha, ha.

SD: +OTHELLO Now he tells how she pluckt him to
my Chamber: oh, I see that nose of yours, but not that
dogge, I shall throw it to.

+CASSIO
Well, I must leaue her companie.

+IAGO
Before me: looke where she comes.

+CAS.
'Tis such another Fitchew: marry a perfum'd one?

SD: Enter +BIANCA.

+CASSIO
What do you meane by this haunting of me?

+BIANCA
Let the diuell, and his dam haunt you: what did
you meane by that same Handkerchiefe, you gaue me euen
now? I was a fine Foole to take it: I must take out the
worke? A likely piece of worke, that you should finde it in
your Chamber, and know not who left it there. This is
some Minxes token, & I must take out the worke?
There, giue it your Hobbey-horse, wheresoeuer you had
it, Ile take out no worke on't.

+CASSIO
How now, my sweete Bianca? How now? How now?

SD: +OTHELLO By Heauen, that should be my
Handkerchiefe.

+BIANCA
If you'le come to supper to night you may, if you
will not, come when you are next prepar'd for.
+BIANCA exits

+IAGO
After her: after her.

+CAS.
I must, shee'l rayle in the streets else.

+IAGO
Will you sup there?

+CASSIO
Yes, I intend so.

+IAGO
Well, I may chance to see you: for I would very faine
speake with you.

+CAS.
Prythee come: will you?

+IAGO
Go too: say no more.
+CASSIO exits

+OTHELLO
How shall I murther him, Iago.

+IAGO
Did you perceiue how he laugh'd at his vice?

+OTHELLO
Oh, Iago.

+IAGO
And did you see the Handkerchiefe?

+OTHELLO
Was that mine?

+IAGO
Yours by this hand: and to see how he prizes the
foolish woman your wife: she gaue it him, and he hath
giu'n it his whore.

+OTHELLO
I would haue him nine yeeres a killing: / A fine
woman, a faire woman, a sweete woman?

+IAGO
Nay, you must forget that.

+OTHELLO
I, let her rot and perish, and be damn'd
to night, for she shall not liue. No, my heart is turn'd to
stone: I strike it, and it hurts my hand. Oh, the world
hath not a sweeter Creature: she might lye by an
Emperours side, and command him Taskes.

+IAGO
Nay, that's not your way.

+OTHELLO
Hang her, I do but say what she is: so delicate
with her Needle: an admirable Musitian. Oh she will sing
the Sauagenesse out of a Beare: of so high and plenteous
wit, and inuention?

+IAGO
She's the worse for all this.

+OTHELLO
Oh, a thousand, a thousand times: / And then of
so gentle a condition?

+IAGO
I too gentle.

+OTHELLO
Nay that's certaine: / But yet the pitty of it, Iago:
oh Iago, the pitty of it Iago.

+IAGO
If you are so fond ouer her iniquitie: giue her pattent
to offend, for if it touch not you, it comes neere
no body.

+OTHELLO
I will chop her into Messes: Cuckold me?

+IAGO
Oh, 'tis foule in her.

+OTHELLO
With mine Officer?

+IAGO
That's fouler.

+OTHELLO
Get me some poyson, Iago, this night. Ile not
expostulate with her: least her body and beautie vnprouide
my mind againe: this night Iago.

+IAGO
Do it not with poyson, strangle her in her bed, / Euen
the bed she hath contaminated.

+OTHELLO
Good, good: / The Iustice of it pleases: very
good.

+IAGO
And for Cassio, let me be his vndertaker: / You shall
heare more by midnight.

+OTHELLO
Excellent good:
What Trumpet is that same?

+IAGO
I warrant something from Venice,

SD: Enter +LODOUICO, +DESDEMONA, and Attendants.

+IAGO
'Tis Lodouico, this,
comes from the Duke. / See, your wife's with him.

+LODO.
Saue you worthy Generall.

+OTHELLO
With all my heart Sir.

+LOD.
The Duke, and the Senators of Venice greet you.

+OTHELLO
I kisse the Instrument of their pleasures.

+DESDEMONA
And what's the newes, good cozen Lodouico?

+IAGO
I am very glad to see you Signior:
Welcome to Cyprus.

+LOD.
I thanke you: how do's Lieutenant Cassio?

+IAGO
Liues Sir,

+DESDEMONA
Cozen, there's falne betweene him, & my Lord,
An vnkind breach: but you shall make all well.

+OTHELLO
Are you sure of that?

+DESDEMONA
My Lord?

+OTHELLO
This faile you not to do, as you will---

+LOD.
He did not call: he's busie in the paper,
Is there deuision 'twixt my Lord, and Cassio?

+DESDEMONA
A most vnhappy one: I would do much
T'attone them, for the loue I beare to Cassio.

+OTHELLO
Fire, and brimestone.

+DESDEMONA
My Lord.

+OTHELLO
Are you wise?

+DESDEMONA
What is he angrie?

+LOD.
May be th Letter mou'd him.
For as I thinke, they do command him home,
Deputing Cassio in his Gouernment.

+DESDEMONA
Trust me, I am glad on't.

+OTHELLO
Indeed?

+DESDEMONA
My Lord?

+OTHELLO
I am glad to see you mad.

+DESDEMONA
Why, sweete Othello?

+OTHELLO
Diuell.

+DESDEMONA
I haue not deseru'd this.

+LOD.
My Lord, this would not be beleeu'd in Venice,
Though I should sweare I saw't. 'Tis very much,
Make her amends: she weepes.

+OTHELLO
Oh diuell, diuell:
If that the Earth could teeme with womans teares,
Each drop she falls, would proue a Crocodile:
Out of my sight.

+DESDEMONA
I will not stay to offend you.

+LOD.
Truely obedient Lady:
I do beseech your Lordship call her backe.

+OTHELLO
Mistris.

+DESDEMONA
My Lord.

+OTHELLO
What would you with her, Sir?

+LOD.
Who I, my Lord?

+OTHELLO
I, you did wish, that I would make her turne:
Sir, she can turne, and turne: and yet go on
And turne againe. And she can weepe, Sir, weepe.
And she's obedient: as you say obedient.
Very obedient: proceed you in your teares.
Concerning this Sir, (oh well-painted passion)
I am commanded home: get you away:
Ile send for you anon. Sir I obey the Mandate,
And will returne to Venice. Hence, auaunt:
Cassio shall haue my Place. And Sir, to night
I do entreat, that we may sup together.
You are welcome Sir to Cyprus. / Goates, and Monkeys.
+OTHELLO exits

+LOD.
Is this the Noble Moore, whom our full Senate
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the Nature
Whom Passion could not shake? Whose solid vertue
The shot of Accident, nor dart of Chance
Could neither graze, nor pierce?

+IAGO
He is much chang'd.

+LOD.
Are his wits safe? Is he not light of Braine?

+IAGO
He's that he is: I may not breath my censure.
What he might be: if what he might, he is not,
I would to heauen he were.

+LOD.
What? Strike his wife?

+IAGO
'Faith that was not so well: yet would I knew
That stroke would proue the worst.

+LOD.
Is it his vse?
Or did the Letters, worke vpon his blood,
And new create his fault?

+IAGO
Alas, alas:
It is not honestie in me to speake
What I haue seene, and knowne. You shall obserue him,
And his owne courses will deonte him so,
That I may saue my speech: do but go after
And marke how he continues.

+LOD.
I am sorry that I am deceiu'd in him.




NS: Act 4 Scene 2

SD: Enter +OTHELLO, and +AMILIA.
+OTHELLO
You haue seene nothing then?

+AMILIA
Nor euer heard: nor euer did suspect.

+OTHELLO
Yes, you haue seene Cassio, and she together.

+AMILIA
But then I saw no harme: and then I heard,
Each syllable that breath made vp betweene them.

+OTHELLO
What? Did they neuer whisper?

+AMILIA
Neuer my Lord.

+OTHELLO
Nor send you out o'th'way?

+AMILIA
Neuer.

+OTHELLO
To fetch her Fan, her Gloues, her Mask, nor no thing?

+AMILIA
Neuer my Lord.

+OTHELLO
That's strange.

+AMILIA
I durst (my Lord) to wager, she is honest:
Lay downe my Soule at stake: If you thinke other,
Remoue your thought. It doth abuse your bosome:
If any wretch haue put this in your head,
Let Heauen requit it with the Serpents curse,
For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
There's no man happy. The purest of their Wiues
Is foule as Slander.

+OTHELLO
Bid her come hither: go.
AMILIA exits.
She saies enough: yet she's a simple Baud
That cannot say as much. This is a subtile Whore:
A Closset Locke and Key of Villanous Secrets,
And yet she'le kneele, and pray: I haue seene her do't.

SD: Enter +DESDEMONA, and +AMILIA.
+DESDEMONA
My Lord, what is your will?

+OTHELLO
Pray you Chucke come hither.

+DESDEMONA
What is your pleasure?

+OTHELLO
Let me see your eyes:
looke in my face.

+DESDEMONA
What horrible Fancie's this?

+OTHELLO
Some of your Function Mistris:
Leaue Procreants alone, and shut the doore:
Cough, or cry hem; if any bodycome:
Your Mystery, your Mystery: May dispatch.
AMILIA exits.

+DESDEMONA
Vpon my knee, what doth your speech import?
I vnderstand a Fury in your words.

+OTHELLO
Why? What art thou?

+DESDEMONA
Your wife my Lord: your true and loyall wife.

+OTHELLO
Come sweare it: damne thy selfe,
least being like one of Heauen, the diuells themselues
should feare to ceaze thee. Therefore be double damn'd:
sweare thou art honest.

+DESDEMONA
Heauen doth truely know it.

+OTHELLO
Heauen truely knowes, that thou art false as hell.

+DESDEMONA
To whom my Lord? / With whom? How am I false?

+OTHELLO
Ah Desdemon, away, away, away.

+DESDEMONA
Alas the heauy day: why do you weepe?
Am I the motiue of these teares my Lord?
If happely you my Father do suspect,
An Instrument of this your calling backe,
Lay not your blame on me: if you haue lost him,
I haue lost him too.

+OTHELLO
Had it pleas'd Heauen,
To try me with Affliction, had they rain'd
All kind of Sores, and Shames on my bare-head:
Steep'd me in pouertie to the very lippes.
Giuen to Captiuitie, me, and my vtmost hopes,
I should haue found in some place of my Soule
A drop of patience. But alas, to make me
The fixed Figure for the time of Scorne,
To point his slow, and mouing finger at.
Yet could I beare that too, well, very well:
But there where I haue garnerd vp my heart,
Where either I must liue, or beare no life,
The Fountaine from the which my currant runnes,
Or else dries vp: to be discarded thence,
Or keepe it as a Cesterne, for foule Toades
To knot and gender in. Turne thy complexion there:
Patience, thou young and Rose-lip'd Cherubin,
I heere looke grim as hell.

+DESDEMONA
I hope my Noble Lord esteemes me honest.

+OTHELLO
Oh I, as Sommer Flyes are in the Shambles,
That quicken euen with blowing. Oh thou weed:
Who art so louely faire, and smell'st so sweete,
That the Sense akes at thee, / Would thou had'st neuer bin borne.

+DESDEMONA
Alas, what ignorant sin haue I committed?

+OTHELLO
Was this faire Paper? This most goodly Booke
Made to write Whore vpon? What commited,
Committed? Oh, thou publicke Commoner,
I should make very Forges of my cheekes,
That would to Cynders burne vp Modestie,
Did I but speake thy deedes. What commited?
Heauen stoppes the Nose at it, and the Moone winks:
The baudy winde that kisses all it meetes,
Is hush'd within the hollow Myne of Earth
And will not hear't. What commited?

+DESDEMONA
By Heauen you do me wrong.

+OTHELLO
Are not you a Strumpet?

+DESDEMONA
No, as I am a Christian.
If to preserue this vessell for my Lord,
From any other foule vnlawfull touch
Be not to be a Strumpet, I am none.

+OTHELLO
What, not a Whore?

+DESDEMONA
No, as I shall be sau'd.

+OTHELLO
Is't possible?

+DESDEMONA
Oh Heauen forgiue vs.

+OTHELLO
I cry you mercy then.
I tooke you for that cunning Whore of Venice,
That married with Othello. You Mistris,
That haue the office opposite to Saint Peter,
And keepes the gate of hell.

SD: Enter +AMILIA.
+OTHELLO
You, you: I you.
We haue done our course: there's money for your paines:
I pray you turne the key, and keepe our counsaile.
OTHELLO exits.

+AMILIA
Alas, what do's this Gentleman conceiue?
How do you Madam? how do you my good Lady?

+DESDEMONA
Faith, halfe a sleepe.

+AMILIA
Good Madam, / What's the matter with my Lord?

+DESDEMONA
With who?

+AMILIA
Why, with my Lord, Madam?

+DESDEMONA
Who is thy Lord?

+AMILIA
He that is yours, sweet Lady.

+DESDEMONA
I haue none: do not talke to me, Amilia,
I cannot weepe: nor answeres haue I none,
But what should go by water. Prythee to night,
Lay on my bed my wedding sheetes, remember,
And call thy husband hither.

+AMILIA
Heere's a change indeed.
AMILIA exits.

+DESDEMONA
'Tis meete I should be vs'd so: very meete.
How haue I bin behau'd, that he might sticke
The small'st opinion on my least misvse?

SD: Enter +IAGO, and +AMILIA.
+IAGO
What is your pleasure Madam? How is't with you?

+DESDEMONA
I cannot tell: those that do teach yong Babes
Do it with gentle meanes, and easie taskes.
He might haue chid me so: for in good faith
I am a Child to chiding.

+IAGO
What is the matter Lady?

+AMILIA
Alas (Iago) my Lord hath so bewhor'd her,
Throwne such dispight, and heauy termes vpon her
That true hearts cannot beare it.

+DESDEMONA
Am I that name, Iago?

+IAGO
What name (faire Lady?)

+DESDEMONA
Such as she said my Lord did say I was.

+AMILIA
He call'd her whore: a Begger in his drinke:
Could not haue laid such termes vpon his Callet.

+IAGO
Why did he so?

+DESDEMONA
I do not know: I am sure I am none such.

+IAGO
Do not weepe, do not weepe: alas the day.

+AMILIA
Hath she forsooke so many Noble Matches?
Her Father? And her Country? And her Friends?
To be call'd Whore? Would it not make one weepe?

+DESDEMONA
It is my wretched Fortune.

+IAGO
Beshrew him for't:
How comes this Tricke vpon him?

+DESDEMONA
Nay, Heauen doth know.

+AMILIA
I will be hang'd, if some eternall Villaine,
Some busie and insinuating Rogue,
Some cogging, cozening Slaue, to get some Office,
Haue not deuis'd this Slander: I will be hang'd else.

+IAGO
Fie, there is no such man: it is impossible.

+DESDEMONA
If any such there be, Heauen pardon him.

+AMILIA
A halter pardon him: / And hell gnaw his bones.
Why should he call her Whore? / Who keepes her companie?
What Place? What Time? / What Forme? What liklyhood?
The Moore's abus'd by some most villanous Knaue,
Some base notorious Knaue, some scuruy Fellow.
Oh Heauens, that such companions thou'd'st vnfold,
And put in euery honest hand a whip
To lash the Rascalls naked through the world,
Euen from the East to th'West.

+IAGO
Speake within doore.

+AMILIA
Oh fie vpon them: some such Squire he was
That turn'd your wit, the seamy-side without,
And made you to suspect me with the Moore.

+IAGO
You are a Foole: go too.

+DESDEMONA
Alas Iago,
What shall I do to win my Lord againe?
Good Friend, go to him: for by this light of Heauen,
I know not how I lost him. Heere I kneele:
If ere my will did trespasse 'gainst his Loue,
Either in discourse of thought, or actuall deed,
Or that mine Eyes, mine Eares, or any Sence
Delighted them: or any other Forme.
Or that I do not yet, and euer did,
And euer will, (though he do shake me off
To beggerly diuorcement) Loue him deerely,
Comfort forsweare me. Vnkindnesse may do much,
And his vnkindnesse may defeat my life,
But neuer taynt my Loue. I cannot say Whore,
It do's abhorre me now I speake the word,
To do the Act, that might the addition earne,
Not the worlds Masse of vanitie could make me.

+IAGO
I pray you be content: 'tis but his humour:
The businesse of the State do's him offence.

+DESDEMONA
If 'twere no other.

+IAGO
It is but so, I warrant,
Hearke how these Instruments summon to supper:
The Messengers of Venice staies the meate,
Go in, and weepe not: all things shall be well.
DESDEMONA and AMILIA exuent.

SD: Enter +RODORIGO.
+IAGO
How now Rodorigo?

+RODORIGO
I do not finde / That thou deal'st iustly with
me.

+IAGO
What in the contrarie?

+RODORIGO
Euery day thou dafts me with some deuise
Iago, and rather, as it seemes to me now, keep'st from me
all conueniencie, then suppliest me with the least aduantage
of hope: I will indeed no longer endure it. Nor
am I yet perswaded to put vp in peace, what already I
haue foolishly suffred.

+IAGO
Will you heare me Rodorigo?

+RODORIGO
I haue heard too much: and your words
and / Performances are no kin together.

+IAGO
You charge me most vniustly.

+RODORIGO
With naught but truth: I haue wasted my selfe
out of my meanes. The Iewels you haue had from me to
deliuer Desdemona, would halfe haue corrupted a
Votarist. You haue told me she hath receiu'd them,
and return'd me expectations and comforts of sodaine respect,
and acquaintance, but I finde none.

+IAGO
Well, go too: very well.

+RODORIGO
Very well, go too: I cannot go too, (man) nor tis
not very well. Nay I think it is scuruy: and begin to
finde my selfe fopt in it.

+IAGO
Very well.

+RODORIGO
I tell you, 'tis not very well: I will make my selfe
knowne to Desdemona. If she will returne me my Iewels,
I will giue ouer my Suit, and repent my vnlawfull solicitation.
If not, assure your selfe, I will seeke satisfaction of
you.

+IAGO
You haue said now.

+RODORIGO
I: and said nothing but what I protest
intendment of doing.

+IAGO
Why, now I see there's mettle in thee: and euen from
this instant do build on thee a better opinion then euer
before: giue me thy hand Rodorigo. Thou hast taken
against me a most iust exception: but yet I protest I haue
dealt most directly in thy Affaire.

+RODORIGO
It hath not appeer'd.

+IAGO
I grant indeed it hath not appeer'd: and your suspition
is not without wit and iudgement. But Rodorigo,
if thou hast that in thee indeed, which I haue greater
reason to beleeue now then euer (I meane purpose,
Courage, and Valour) this night shew it. If thou the
next night following enioy not Desdemona, take me from
this world with Treacherie, and deuise Engines for my life.

+RODORIGO
Well: what is it? Is it within, reason and
compasse?

+IAGO
Sir, there is especiall Commission come from Venice
to depute Cassio in Othello's place.

+RODORIGO
Is that true? Why then Othello and Desdemona
returne againe to Venice.

+IAGO
Oh no: he goes into Mauritania and taketh away with
him the faire Desdemona, vnlesse his abode be lingred
heere by some accident. Wherein none can be so determinate,
as the remouing of Cassio.

+RODORIGO
How do you meane remouing him?

+IAGO
Why, by making him vncapable of Othello's place:
knocking out his braines.

+RODORIGO
And that you would haue me to do.

+IAGO
I: if you dare do your selfe a profit, and a right. He
sups to night with a Harlotry: and thither will I go to
him. He knowes not yet of his Honourable Fortune, if
you will watch his going thence (which I will fashion to
fall out betweene twelue and one) you may take him at
your pleasure. I will be neere to second your Attempt,
and he shall fall betweene vs. Come, stand not amaz'd
at it, but go along with me: I will shew you such a
necessitie in his death, that you shall thinke your selfe
bound to put it on him. It is now high supper time: and
the night growes to wast. About it.

+RODORIGO
I will heare further reason for this.

+IAGO
And you shalbe satisfi'd.
Exuent IAGO, RODORIGO.

NS: Act 4 Scene 3

SD: Enter +OTHELLO, +LODOVICO, +DESDEMONA, +AMILIA, and Atendants.
+LODOVICO
I do beseech you Sir, trouble your selfe no further.

+OTHELLO
Oh pardon me: 'twill do me good to walke.

+LODOVICO
Madam, good night: I humbly thanke your Ladyship.

+DESDEMONA
Your Honour is most welcome.

+OTHELLO
Will you walke Sir?
Oh Desdemona.

+DESDEMONA
My Lord.

+OTHELLO
Get you to bed on th'instant, I will be return'd
forthwith: dismisse your Attendant there: look't be done.

+DESDEMONA
I will my Lord.
DESDEMONA exits.

+AMILIA
How goes it now? He lookes gentler then he did.

+DESDEMONA
He saies he will returne incontinent,
And hath commanded me to go to bed,
And bid me to dismisse you.

+AMILIA
Dismisse me?

+DESDEMONA
It was his bidding: therefore good Amilia,
Giue me my nightly wearing, and adieu.
We must not now displease him.

+AMILIA
I, would you had neuer seene him.

+DESDEMONA
So would not I: my loue doth so approue him,
That euen his stubbornesse, his checks, his frownes,
(Prythee vn-pin me) haue grace and fauour.

+AMILIA
I haue laid those Sheetes you bad me on the bed.

+DESDEMONA
All's one: good Father, how foolish are our minds?
If I do die before, prythee shrow'd me
In one of these same Sheetes.

+AMILIA
Come, come: you talke.

+DESDEMONA
My Mother had a Maid call'd Barbarie,
She was in loue: and he she lou'd prou'd mad,
And did forsake her. She had a Song of Willough,
An old thing 'twas: but it express'd her Fortune,
And she dy'd singing it. That Song to night,
Will not go from my mind: I haue much to do,
But to go hang my head all at one side
And sing it like poore Brabarie: prythee dispatch.

+AMILIA
Shall I go fetch your Night-gowne?

+DESDEMONA
No, vn-pin me here,
This Lodouico is a proper man.

+AMILIA
A very handsome man.

+DESDEMONA
He speakes well.

+AMILIA
I know a Lady in Venice would haue walk'd barefoot
to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.

+DESDEMONA
The poore Soule sat singing, by a Sicamour tree.
Sing all a greene Willough:
Her hand on her bosome her head on her knee,
Sing Willough, Willough, Wtllough.
The fresh Streames ran by her, and murmur'd her moanes
Sing Willough, &c.
Her salt teares fell from her, and softned the stones,
Sing Willough, &c.
(Lay by these)
Willough, Willough.
(Prythee high thee: he'le come anon)
Sing all a greene Willough must be my Garland.
Let no body blame him, his scorne I approue.
(Nay that's not next. Harke, who is't that knocks?

+AMILIA
It's the wind.

+DESDEMONA
I call'd my Loue false Loue: but what said he then?
Sing Willough, &c.
If I court mo women, you'le couch with mo men.
So get thee gone, good night: mine eyes do itch:
Doth that boade weeping?

+AMILIA
'Tis neyther heere, nor there.

+DESDEMONA
I haue heard it said so. O these Men, these men!
Do'st thou in conscience thinke (tell me Amilia)
That there be women do abuse their husbands
In such grosse kinde?

+AMILIA
There be some such, no question.

+DESDEMONA
Would'st thou do such a deed for all the world?

+AMILIA
Why, would not you?

+DESDEMONA
No, by this Heauenly light.

+AMILIA
Nor I neither, by this Heauenly light: / I might doo't
as well i'th'darke.

+DESDEMONA
Would'st thou do such a deed for al the
world?

+AMILIA
The world's a huge thing: / It is a great price, for a
small vice.

+DESDEMONA
Introth, I thinke thou would'st not.

+AMILIA
Introth I thinke I should, and vndoo't when I had
done. Marry, I would not doe such a thing for a ioynt
Ring, nor for measures of Lawne, nor for Gownes, Petticoats,
nor Caps, nor any petty exhibition. But for all the whole
world: why, who would not make her husband a
Cuckold, to make him a Monarch? I should venture
Purgatory for't.

+DESDEMONA
Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong / For
the whole world.

+AMILIA
Why, the wrong is but a wrong i'th'world; and
hauing the world for your labour, 'tis a wrong in your
owne world, and you might quickly make it right.

+DESDEMONA
I do not thinke there is any such woman.

+AMILIA
Yes, a dozen: and as many to'th'vantage, as would
store the world they plaid for.
But I do thinke it is their Husbands faults
If Wiues do fall: (Say, that they slacke their duties,
And powre our Treasures into forraigne laps;
Or else breake out in peeuish Iealousies,
Throwing restraint vpon vs: Or say they strike vs,
Or scant our former hauing in despight)
Why we haue galles: and though we haue some Grace,
Yet haue we some Reuenge. Let Husbands know,
Their wiues haue sense like them: They see, and smell,
And haue their Palats both for sweet, and sowre,
As Husbands haue. What is it that they do,
When they change vs for others? Is it Sport?
I thinke it is: and doth Affection breed it?
I thinke it doth. Is't Frailty that thus erres?
It is so too. And haue not we Affections?
Desires for Sport? and Frailty, as men haue?
Then let them vse vs well: else let them know,
The illes we do, their illes instruct vs so.

+DESDEMONA
Good night, good night: / Heauen me such vses send,
Not to picke bad, from bad; but by bad, mend.
Exuent DESDEMONA, AMILIA




NS: Act 5 Scene 1

SD: Enter +IAGO, and +RODORIGO.
+IAGO

Heere, stand behinde this Barke, / Straight will he come:
Weare thy good Rapier bare, and put it home:
Quicke, quicke, feare nothing; Ile be at thy Elbow,
It makes vs, or it marres vs, thinke on that,
And fixe most firme thy Resolution.
+RODORIGO

Be neere at hand, I may miscarry in't.
+IAGO

Heere, at thy hand: Be bold, & take thy stand.
+RODORIGO

I haue no great deuotion to the deed,
And yet he hath giuen me satisfying Reasons:
'Tis but a man gone. Forth my Sword: he dies.
+IAGO

I haue rub'd this yong Quat almost to the sense,
And he growes angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
Euery way makes my gaine. Liue Rodorigo,
He calles me to a restitution large
Of Gold, and Iewels, that I bob'd from him,
As Guifts to Desdemona.
It must not be: If Cassio do remaine,
He hath a dayly beauty in his life,
That makes me vgly: and besides, the Moore
May vnfold me to him: there stand I in much perill:
No, he must dye. But so, I heard him comming.
SD: Enter +CASSIO.
+RODORIGO

I know his gate, 'tis he: Villaine thou dyest.
+CASSIO

That thrust had beene mine enemy indeed,
But that my Coate is better then thou know'st:
I will make proofe of thine.
+RODORIGO

Oh, I am slaine.
+CASSIO

I am maym'd for euer: / Helpe hoa: Murther, murther.
SD: Enter +OTHELLO.
+OTHELLO

The voyce of Cassio, Iago keepes his word.
+RODORIGO

O Villaine that I am.
+OTHELLO

It is euen so.
+CASSIO

Oh helpe hoa: Light, a Surgeon.
+OTHELLO

'Tis he: O braue Iago, honest, and iust,
That hast such Noble sense of thy Friends wrong,
Thou teachest me. Minion, your deere lyes dead,
And your vnblest Fate highes: Strumpet I come:
For of my heart, those Charmes thine Eyes, are blotted.
Thy Bed lust-stain'd, shall with Lusts blood bee spotted.
SD: +OTHELLO exits
SD: Enter +LODOUICO and +GRATIANO.
+CASSIO

What hoa? no Watch? No passage? / Murther, Murther.
+GRATIANO

'Tis some mischance, the voyce is very direfull.
+CASSIO

Oh helpe.
+LODOUICO

Hearke.
+RODORIGO

Oh wretched Villaine.
+LODOUICO

Two or three groane. 'Tis heauy night;
These may be counterfeits: Let's think't vnsafe
To come into the cry, without more helpe.
+RODORIGO

Nobody come: then shall I bleed to death.
+LODOUICO

Hearke.
SD: Enter +IAGO.
+GRATIANO

Here's one comes in his shirt, with Light, and Weapons.
+IAGO

Who's there? / Who's noyse is this that cries on murther?
+LODOUICO

We do not know.
+IAGO

Do not you heare a cry?
+CASSIO

Heere, heere: for heauen sake helpe me.
+IAGO

What's the matter?
+GRATIANO

This is Othello's Ancient, as I take it.
+LODOUICO

The same indeede, a very valiant Fellow.
+IAGO

What are you heere, that cry so greeuously?
+CASSIO

Iago? Oh I am spoyl'd, vndone by Villaines:
Giue me some helpe.
+IAGO

O mee, Lieutenant! / What Villaines haue done this?
+CASSIO

I thinke that one of them is heereabout.
And cannot make away.
+IAGO

Oh treacherous Villaines:
What are you there? Come in, and giue some helpe.
+RODORIGO

O helpe me there.
+CASSIO

That's one of them.
+IAGO

Oh murd'rous Slaue! O Villaine!
+RODORIGO

O damn'd Iago! O inhumane Dogge!
+IAGO

Kill men i'th'darke? / Where be these bloody Theeues?
How silent is this Towne? Hoa, murther, murther.
What may you be? Are you of good, or euill?
+LODOUICO

As you shall proue vs, praise vs.
+IAGO

Signior Lodouico?
+LODOUICO

He Sir.
+IAGO

I cry you mercy: here's Cassio hurt by Villaines.
+GRATIANO

Cassio?
+IAGO

How is't Brother?
+CASSIO

My Legge is cut in two.
+IAGO

Marry heauen forbid:
Light Gentlemen, Ile binde it with my shirt.
SD: Enter +BIANCA.
+BIANCA

What is the matter hoa? Who is't that cry'd?
+IAGO

Who is't that cry'd?
+BIANCA

Oh my deere Cassio, / My sweet Cassio:
Oh Cassio, Cassio, Cassio.
+IAGO

O notable Strumpet. Cassio, may you suspect
Who they should be, that haue thus mangled you?
+CASSIO

No.
+GRATIANO

I am sorry to finde you thus; / I haue beene to seeke you.
+IAGO

Lend me a Garter. So: ---Oh for a Chaire
To beare him easily hence.
+BIANCA

Alas he faints.
Oh Cassio, Cassio, Cassio.
+IAGO

Gentlemen all, I do suspect this Trash
To be a party in this Iniurie.
Patience awhile, good Cassio. Come, come;
Lend me a Light: know we this face, or no?
Alas my Friend, and my deere Countryman
Rodorigo? No: Yes sure: Yes, 'tis Rodorigo.
+GRATIANO

What, of Venice?
+IAGO

Euen he Sir: Did you know him?
+GRATIANO

Know him? I.
+IAGO

Signior Gratiano? I cry your gentle pardon:
These bloody accidents must excuse my Manners,
That so neglected you.
+GRATIANO

I am glad to see you.
+IAGO

How do you Cassio? Oh, a Chaire, a Chaire.
+GRATIANO

Rodorigo?
+IAGO

He, he, 'tis he:
Oh that's well said, the Chaire.
Some good man beare him carefully from hence,
Ile fetch the Generall's Surgeon. For you Mistris,
Saue you your labour. He that lies slaine heere (Cassio)
Was my deere friend. What malice was between you?
+CASSIO

None in the world: nor do I know the man?
+IAGO

What? looke you pale? Oh beare him o'th'Ayre.
Stay you good Gentlemen. Looke you pale, Mistris?
Do you perceiue the gastnesse of her eye?
Nay, if you stare, we shall heare more anon.
Behold her well: I pray you looke vpon her:
Do you see Gentlemen? Nay, guiltinesse will speake
Though tongues were out of vse.
+AMIL.

Alas, what is the matter? / What is the matter, Husband?
+IAGO

Cassio hath heere bin set on in the darke
By Rodorigo, and Fellowes that are scap'd:
He's almost slaine, and Rodorigo quite dead.
+AMIL.

Alas good Gentleman: alas good Cassio.
+IAGO

This is the fruits of whoring. Prythe Amilia,
Go know of Cassio where he supt to night.
What, do you shake at that?
+BIANCA

He supt at my house, but I therefore shake not.
+IAGO

O did he so? I charge you go with me.
+AMIL.

Oh fie vpon thee Strumpet.
+BIANCA

I am no Strumpet, but of life as honest,
As you that thus abuse me.
+AMIL.

As I? Fie vpon thee.
+IAGO

Kinde Gentlemen: / Let's go see poore Cassio drest.
Come Mistris, you must tel's another Tale.
Amilia, run you to the Cittadell,
And tell my Lord and Lady, what hath happ'd:
Will you go on afore? This is the night
That either makes me, or foredoes me quight.
SD: Exeunt +IAGO, +RODORIGO, +CASSIO, +OTHELLO, +LODOUICO, +GRATIANO, +BIANCA, +AMIL.




NS: Act 5, Scene 2

SD: Enter +OTHELLO, and DESDEMONA in her bed.	

+OTHELLO
It is the Cause, it is the Cause (my Soule)	
Let me not name it to you, you chaste Starres,	
It is the Cause. Yet Ile not shed her blood,	
Nor scarre that whiter skin of hers, then Snow,	
And smooth as Monumentall Alablaster:	
Yet she must dye, else shee'l betray more men:	
Put out the Light, and then put out the Light:	
If I quench thee, thou flaming Minister,	
I can againe thy former light restore,	
Should I repent me. But once put out thy Light,	
Thou cunning'st Patterne of excelling Nature,	
I know not where is that Promethaan heate	
That can thy Light re-Lume. / When I haue pluck'd thy Rose,	
I cannot giue it vitall growth againe,	
It needs must wither. Ile smell thee on the Tree.	
Oh Balmy breath, that dost almost perswade	
Iustice to breake her Sword. One more, one more:	
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,	
And loue thee after. One more, and that's the last.	
So sweet, was ne're so fatall. I must weepe,	
But they are cruell Teares: This sorrow's heauenly,	
It strikes, where it doth loue. She wakes.	

+DESDEMONA
Who's there? Othello?	

+OTHELLO
I Desdemona.	

+DESDEMONA
Will you come to bed, my Lord?	

+OTHELLO
Haue you pray'd to night, Desdemon?	

+DESDEMONA
I my Lord.	

+OTHELLO
If you bethinke your selfe of any Crime	
Vnreconcil'd as yet to Heauen, and Grace,	
Solicite for it straight.	

+DESDEMONA
Alacke, my Lord, / What may you meane by that?	

+OTHELLO
Well, do it, and be breefe, I will walke by:	
I would not kill thy vnprepared Spirit,	
No, Heauens fore-fend) I would not kill thy Soule.	

+DESDEMONA
Talke you of killing?	

+OTHELLO
I, I do.	

+DESDEMONA
Then Heauen
haue mercy on mee.	

+OTHELLO
Amen, with all my heart.	

+DESDEMONA
If you say, I hope you will not kill me.	

+OTHELLO
Humh.	

+DESDEMONA
And yet I feare you: for you're fatall then	
When your eyes rowle so. / Why I should feare, I know not,	
Since guiltinesse I know not: But yet I feele I feare.	

+OTHELLO
Thinke on thy sinnes.	

+DESDEMONA
They are Loues I beare to you.	

+OTHELLO
I, and for that thou dy'st.	

+DESDEMONA
That death's vnnaturall, that kils for louing.	
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether-lip?	
Some bloody passion shakes your very Frame:	
These are portents: but yet I hope, I hope,	
They do not point on me.	

+OTHELLO
Peace, and be still.	

+DESDEMONA
I will so: What's the matter?	

+OTHELLO
That Handkerchiefe / Which I so lou'd, and gaue thee,	
thou gau'st to Cassio.	

+DESDEMONA
No by my Life, and Soule:	
send for the man, / And aske him.	

+OTHELLO
Sweet Soule, take heed,	
take heed of Periury, / Thou art on thy death-bed.	

+DESDEMONA
I, but not yet to dye.	

+OTHELLO
Presently.	
Therefore confesse thee freely of thy sinne:	
For to deny each Article with Oath,	
Cannot remoue, nor choake the strong Conception	
That I do grone withall. Thou art to dye.	

+DESDEMONA
O Heauen haue mercy on me.	

+OTHELLO
I say, Amen.	

+DESDEMONA
And haue you mercy too. I neuer did	
Offend you in my life: neuer lou'd Cassio,	
But with such generall warrantie of Heauen,	
As I might loue. I neuer gaue him Token.	

+OTHELLO
By Heauen I saw my Handkerchiefe in's hand.	
O periur'd woman, thou do'st stone my heart,	
And makes me call, what I intend to do,	
A Murther, which I thought a Sacrifice.	
I saw the Handkerchiefe.	

+DESDEMONA
He found it then:	
I neuer gaue it him: Send, for him hither:	
Let him confesse a truth.	

+OTHELLO
He hath confest.	

+DESDEMONA
What, my Lord?	

+OTHELLO
That he hath vs'd thee.	

+DESDEMONA
How? vnlawfully?	

+OTHELLO
I.	

+DESDEMONA
He will not say so.	

+OTHELLO
No: his mouth is stopp'd:	
Honest Iago hath 'tane order for't.	

+DESDEMONA
Oh, my feare interprets. What is he dead?	

+OTHELLO
Had all his haires bin liues, my great Reuenge	
Had stomacke for them all.	

+DESDEMONA
Alas, he is betray'd, and I vndone.	

+OTHELLO
Out Strumpet: weep'st thou for him to my face?	

+DESDEMONA
O banish me, my Lord, but kill me not.	

+OTHELLO
Downe Strumpet.	

+DESDEMONA
Kill me to morrow, let me liue to night.	

+OTHELLO
Nay, if you striue.	

+DESDEMONA
But halfe an houre.	

+OTHELLO
Being done, there is no pawse.	

+DESDEMONA
But while I say one prayer.	

+OTHELLO
It is too late.	
SD: Smothers her.+AMILIA at the doore.	

+AMILIA
My Lord, my Lord? What hoa? My Lord, my Lord.	

+OTHELLO
What noise is this? Not dead? not yet quite dead?	
I that am cruell, am yet mercifull,	
I would not haue thee linger in thy paine?	
So, so.	

+AMILIA
within.
What hoa? my Lord, my Lord?	

+OTHELLO
Who's there?	

+AMILIA
Oh good my Lord, I would speake a word with you.	

+OTHELLO
Yes: 'Tis Amilia: by and by. Shee's dead.	
'Tis like she comes to speake of Cassio's death:	
The noise was high. Hah, no more moouing?	
Still as the Graue. Shall she come in? Wer't good?	
I thinke she stirres againe. No, what's best to do?	
If she come in, shee'l sure speake to my wife:	
My wife, my wife: what wife? I haue no wife.	
Oh insupportable! Oh heauy houre!	
Me thinkes, it should be now a huge Eclipse	
Of Sunne, and Moone; and that th'affrighted Globe	
Did yawne at Alteration.	

+AMILIA
I do beseech you	
That I may speake with you. Oh good my Lord.	

+OTHELLO
I had forgot thee: oh come in Amilia.	
SD: Soft, by and by, let me the Curtaines draw. Where art thou? What's the matter with thee now? Enter +AMILIA.	

+AMILIA
Oh my good Lord, yonders foule Murthers done.	

+OTHELLO
What? now?	

+AMILIA
But now, my Lord.	

+OTHELLO
It is the very error of the Moone,	
She comes more neerer Earth then she was wont,	
And makes men mad.	

+AMILIA
Cassio, my Lord, hath kill'd / A young Venetian,	
call'd Rodorigo.	

+OTHELLO
Rodorigo kill'd?	
and Cassio kill'd?	

+AMILIA
No, Cassio is not kill'd.	

+OTHELLO
Not Cassio kill'd? Then Murther's out of tune,	
And sweet Reuenge growes harsh.	

+DESDEMONA
O falsely, falsely murder'd.	

+AMILIA
Alas! what cry is that?	

+OTHELLO
That? What?	

+AMILIA
Out, and alas, that was my Ladies voice.	
Helpe, helpe hoa, helpe. Oh Ladie speake againe,	
Sweet Desdemona, oh sweet Mistris, speake.	

+DESDEMONA
A guiltlesse death, I dye.	

+AMILIA
Oh who hath done this deed?	

+DESDEMONA
No body: I my selfe, farewell:	
Commend me to my kinde Lord: oh farewell.	

+OTHELLO
Why, how should she be murdred?	

+AMILIA
Alas: who knowes?	

+OTHELLO
You heare her say her selfe, it was not I.	

+AMILIA
She said so: I must needs report the truth.	

+OTHELLO
She's like a Liar gone to burning hell,	
'Twas I that kill'd her.	

+AMILIA
Oh the more Angell she,	
and you the blacker Diuell.	

+OTHELLO
She turn'd to folly: and she was a whore.	

+AMILIA
Thou do'st bely her, and thou art a diuell.	

+OTHELLO
She was false as water.	

+AMILIA
Thou art rash as fire, to say	
That she was false. Oh she was heauenly true.	

+OTHELLO
Cassio did top her: Ask thy husband else.	
O, I were damn'd beneath all depth in hell:	
But that I did proceed vpon iust grounds	
To this extremity. Thy Husband knew it all.	

+AMILIA
My Husband?	

+OTHELLO
Thy Husband.	

+AMILIA
That she was false to Wedlocke?	

+OTHELLO
I, with Cassio: had she bin true,	
If Heauen would make me such another world,	
Of one entyre and perfect Chrysolite,	
I'ld not haue sold her for it.	

+AMILIA
My Husband?	

+OTHELLO
I, 'twas he that told me on her first,	
An honest man he is, and hates the slime	
That stickes on filthy deeds.	

+AMILIA
My Husband?	

+OTHELLO
What needs this itterance, Woman? / I say, thy Husband.	

+AMILIA
Oh Mistris, / Villany hath made mockes with loue:	
My Husband say she was false?	

+OTHELLO
He, Woman;	
I say thy Husband: Do'st vnderstand the word?	
My Friend, thy Husband; honest, honest Iago.	

+AEMILIA
If he say so, may his pernicious Soule	
Rot halfe a graine a day: he lyes to'th'heart,	
She was too fond of her most filthy Bargaine.	

+OTHELLO
Hah?	

+AMILIA
Do thy wotst:	
This deede of thine is no more worthy Heauen,	
Then thou was't worthy her.	

+OTHELLO
Peace, you were best.	

+AMILIA
Thou hast not halfe that powre to do me harm,	
As I haue to be hurt. Oh Gull, oh dolt,	
As ignorant as durt: thou hast done a deed	
(I care not for thy Sword) Ile make thee known,	
Though I lost twenty liues. Helpe, helpe, hoa, helpe:	
The Moore hath kill'd my Mistris. Murther, murther.	
SD: Enter +MONTANO, +GRATIANO, and +IAGO.	

+MONTANO
What is the matter? How now Generall?	

+AMILIA
Oh, are you come, Iago: you haue done well,	
That men must lay their Murthers on your necke.	

+GRATIANO
What is the matter?	

+AMILIA
Disproue this Villaine, if thou bee'st a man:	
He sayes, thou told'st him that his wife was false:	
I know thou did'st not: thou'rt not such a Villain.	
Speake, for my heart is full.	

+IAGO
I told him what I thought, / And told no more	
Then what he found himselfe was apt, and true.	

+AMILIA
But did you euer tell him, / She was false?	

+IAGO
I did.	

+AMILIA
You told a Lye an odious damned Lye:	
Vpon my Soule, a Lye; a wicked Lye.	
Shee false with Cassio? / Did you say with Cassio?	

+IAGO
With Cassio, Mistris? / Go too, charme your tongue.	

+EMILIA
I will not charme my Tongue; / I am bound to speake,	
My Mistris heere lyes murthered in her bed.	

+OTHELLO, +MONTANO, +GRATIANO, +IAGO, +AMILIA
Oh Heauens, forefend.	

+EMILIA
And your reports haue set the Murder on.	

+OTHELLO
Nay stare not Masters, / It is true indeede.	

+GRATIANO
'Tis a strange Truth.	

+MONTANO
O monstrous Acte.	

+EMILIA
Villany, villany, villany:	
I thinke vpon't, I thinke: I smel't: O Villany:	
I thought so then: Ile kill my selfe for greefe.	
O villany! villany!	

+IAGO
What, are you mad? / I charge you get you home.	

+EMILIA
Good Gentlemen, let me haue leaue to speake:	
'Tis proper I obey him; but not now:	
Perchance Iago, I will ne're go home.	

+OTHELLO
Oh, oh, oh.	

+EMILIA
Nay; lay thee downe, and roare:	
For thou hast kill'd the sweetest innocent,	
That ere did lift vp eye.	

+OTHELLO
Oh she was fowle!	
I scarse did know you Vnkle, there lies your Neece,	
Whose breath (indeed) these hands haue newly stopp'd:	
I know this acte shewes horrible and grim.	

+GRATIANO
Poore Desdemon: / I am glad thy Father's dead,	
Thy Match was mortall to him: and pure greefe	
Shore his old thred in twaine. Did he liue now,	
This sight would make him do a desperate turne:	
Yea, curse his better Angell from his side,	
And fall to Reprobance.	

+OTHELLO
'Tis pittifull: but yet Iago knowes	
That she with Cassio, hath the Act of shame	
A thousand times committed. Cassio confest it,	
And she did gratifie his amorous workes	
With that Recognizance and pledge of Loue	
Which I first gaue her: I saw it in his hand:	
It was a Handkerchiefe, an Antique Token	
My Father gaue my Mother.	

+EMILIA
Oh Heauen! oh heauenly Powres!	

+IAGO
Come, hold your peace.	

+EMILIA
'Twill out, 'twill out. I peace?	
No, I will speake as liberall as the North;	
Let Heauen, and Men, and Diuels, let them all,	
All, all, crie shame against me, yet Ile speake.	

+IAGO
Be wise, and get you home.	

+EMILIA
I will not.	

+GRATIANO
Fye,
your Sword vpon a Woman.	

+EMILIA
Oh thou dull Moore, / That Handkerchiefe thou speak'st of	
I found by Fortune, and did giue my Husband:	
For often, with a solemne earnestnesse,	
(More then indeed belong'd to such a Trifle)	
He begg'd of me, to steale't.	

+IAGO
Villanous Whore.	

+EMILIA
She giue it Cassio? No, alas I found it,	
And I did giu't my Husband.	

+IAGO
Filth, thou lyest.	

+EMILIA
By Heauen I do not, I do not Gentlemen:	
Oh murd'rous Coxcombe, what should such a Foole	
Do with so good a wife?	

+OTHELLO
Are there no stones in Heauen,	
But what serues for the Thunder? / Precious Villaine.	
SD: +IAGO stabs +EMILIA
+GRATIANO
The woman falles: / Sure he hath kill'd his Wife.	

+EMILIA
I, I: oh lay me by my Mistris side.	

+GRATIANO
Hee's gone, but his wife's kill'd.	

+MONTANO
'Tis a notorious Villain: take you this weapon	
Which I haue recouer'd from the Moore:	
Come guard the doore without, let him not passe,	
But kill him rather. Ile after that same villaine,	
For 'tis a damned Slaue.	
SD: +MONTANO exits

+OTHELLO
I am not valiant neither:	
But euery Punie whipster gets my Sword.	
But why should Honor out-liue Honesty?	
Let it go all.	

+AMILIA
What did thy Song boad Lady?	
Hearke, canst thou heare me? I will play the Swan,	
And dye in Musicke: Willough, Willough, Willough.	
Moore, she was chaste: She lou'd thee, cruell Moore,	
So come my Soule to blisse, as I speake true:	
So speaking as I thinke, alas, I dye.	

+OTHELLO
I haue another weapon in this Chamber,	
It was a Sword of Spaine, the Ice brookes temper:	
Oh heere it is: Vnkle I must come forth.	

+GRATIANO
If thou attempt it, it will cost thee deere;	
Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.	

+OTHELLO
Looke in vpon me then, and speake with me,	
Or naked as I am I will assault thee.	

+GRATIANO
What is the matter?	

+OTHELLO
Behold, I haue a weapon:	
A better neuer did it selfe sustaine	
Vpon a Soldiers Thigh. I haue seene the day,	
That with this little Arme, and this good Sword,	
I haue made my way through more impediments	
Then twenty times your stop. But (oh vaine boast)	
Who can controll his Fate? 'Tis not so now.	
Be not affraid, though you do see me weapon'd:	
Heere is my iournies end, heere is my butt	
And verie Sea-marke of my vtmost Saile.	
Do you go backe dismaid? 'Tis a lost feare:	
Man but a Rush against Othello's brest,	
And he retires. Where should Othello go?	
Now: how dost thou looke now? Oh ill-Starr'd wench,	
Pale as thy Smocke: when we shall meete at compt,	
This looke of thine will hurle my Soule from Heauen,	
And Fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my Girle?	
Euen like thy Chastity.	
O cursed, cursed Slaue! / Whip me ye Diuels,	
From the possession of this Heauenly sight:	
Blow me about in windes, roast me in Sulphure,	
Wash me in steepe-downe gulfes of Liquid fire.	
Oh Desdemon! dead Desdemon: dead. Oh, oh!	
SD: Enter +LODOUICO, +CASSIO, MONTANO, and +IAGO, with Officers.	

+LODOUICO
Where is this rash, and most vnfortunate man?	

+OTHELLO
That's he that was Othello: heere I am.	

+LODOUICO
Where is that Viper? / Bring the Villaine forth.	

+OTHELLO
I look down towards his feet; but that's a Fable,	
If that thou bee'st a Diuell, I cannot kill thee.	

+LODOUICO
Wrench his Sword from him.	

+IAGO
I bleed Sir, but not kill'd.	

+OTHELLO
I am not sorry neither, Il'd haue thee liue:	
For in my sense, 'tis happinesse to die.	

+LODOUICO
Oh thou Othello, that was once so good,	
Falne in the practise of a cursed Slaue,	
What shall be saide to thee.	

+OTHELLO
Why any thing:	
An honourable Murderer, if you will:	
For nought I did in hate, but all in Honour.	

+LODOUICO
This wretch hath part confest his Villany:	
Did you and he consent in Cassio's death.	

+OTHELLO
I.	

+CASSIO
Deere Generall, I neuer gaue you cause.	

+OTHELLO
I do beleeue it, and I aske your pardon:	
Will you, I pray, demand that demy-Diuell,	
Why he hath thus ensnar'd my Soule and Body.	

+IAGO
Demand me nothing: what you know, you know:	
From this time forth, I neuer will speake word.	

+LODOUICO
What? not to pray?	

+GRATIANO
Torments will ope your lips.	

+OTHELLO
Well, thou dost best.	

+LODOUICO
Sir, / You shall vnderstand what hath befalne,	
(Which, as I thinke, you know not) heere is a Letter	
Found in the pocket of the slaine Rodorigo,	
And heere another, the one of them imports	
The death of Cassio, to be vndertooke	
By Rodorigo.	

+OTHELLO
O Villaine!	

+CASSIO
Most Heathenish, and most grosse.	

+LODOUICO
Now, heere's another discontented paper	
Found in his pocket too: and this it seemes	
Rodorigo meant t'haue sent this damned villaine:	
But that (belike) Iago in the interim	
Came in, and satisfi'd him.	

+OTHELLO
Oh thou pernitious Caitiffe;	
How came you (Cassio) by that Handkerchiefe	
That was my wiues?	

+CASSIO
I found it in my Chamber:	
And he himselfe confest it but euen now,	
That there he dropt it for a speciall purpose,	
Which wrought to his desire.	

+OTHELLO
O Foole, foole, foole!	

+CASSIO
There is besides, in Rodorigo's Letter,	
How he vpbraides Iago, that he made him	
Braue me vpon the Watch: whereon it came	
That I was cast: and euen but now he spake	
(After long seeming dead) Iago hurt him,	
Iago set him on.	

+LODOUICO
You must forsake this roome, and go with vs:	
Your Power, and your Command is taken off,	
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this Slaue,	
If there be any cunning Crueltie,	
That can torment him much, and hold him long,	
It shall be his. You shall close Prisoner rest,	
Till that the Nature of your fault be knowne	
To the Venetian State. Come, bring away.	

+OTHELLO
Soft you; a word or two before you goe:	
I haue done the State some seruice, and they know't:	
No more of that. I pray you in your Letters,	
When you shall these vnluckie deeds relate,	
Speake of me, as I am. Nothing extenuate,	
Nor set downe ought in malice. / Then must you speake,	
Of one that lou'd not wisely, but too well:	
Of one, not easily Iealious, but being wrought,	
Perplexed in the extreame: Of one, whose hand	
(Like the base Iudean) threw a Pearle away	
Richer then all his Tribe: Of one, whose subdu'd Eyes,	
Albeit vn-vsed to the melting moode,	
Drops teares as fast as the Arabian Trees	
Their Medicinable gumme. Set you downe this:	
And say besides, that in Aleppo once,	
Where a malignant, and a Turbond-Turke	
Beate a Venetian, and traduc'd the State,	
I tooke by th'throat the circumcised Dogge,	
And smoate him, thus.	

+LODOUICO
Oh bloody period.	

+GRATIANO
All that is spoke, is marr'd.	

+OTHELLO
I kist thee, ere I kill'd thee: No way but this,	
Killing my selfe, to dye vpon a kisse.	
SD: +OTHELLO dies

+CASSIO
This did I feare, but thought he had no weapon:	
For he was great of heart.	

+LODOUICO
Oh Sparton Dogge:	
More fell then Anguish, Hunger, or the Sea:	
Looke on the Tragicke Loading of this bed:	
This is thy worke: / The Obiect poysons Sight,	
Let it be hid.	
Gratiano, keepe the house,	
And seize vpon the Fortunes of the Moore,	
For they succeede on you. To you, Lord Gouernor,	
Remaines the Censure of this hellish villaine:	
The Time, the Place, the Torture, oh inforce it:	
My selfe will straight aboord, and to the State,	
This heauie Act, with heauie heart relate.	
SD: Exeunt +LODOUICO, +CASSIO, +GRATIANO, +IAGO


