NS: Act 5 Scene 1

SD: Enter +ROMEO.
+ROMEO
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleepe,
My dreames presage some ioyfull newes at hand:
My bosomes L. sits lightly in his throne:
And all thisan day an vccustom'd spirit,
Lifts me aboue the ground with cheerefull thoughts.
I dreamt my Lady came and found me dead,
[Strange dreame that giues a dead man leaue to thinke,]
And breath'd such life with kisses in my lips,
That I reuiu'd and was an Emperour.
Ah me, how sweet is loue it selfe possest,
When but loues shadowes are so rich in ioy.
SD: Enter ROMEO'S man.
+ROMEO
Newes from Verona, how now +BALTHAZER?
Dost thou not bring me Letters from the Frier?
How doth my Lady? Is my Father well?
How doth my Lady Iuliet? that I aske againe,
For nothing can be ill, if she be well.
+BALTHAZER
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
Her body sleepes in Capels Monument,
And her immortall part with Angels liue,
I saw her laid low in her kindreds Vault,
And presently tooke Poste to tell it you:
O pardon me for bringing these ill newes,
Since you did leaue it for my office Sir.
+ROMEO
Is it euen so? / Then I denie you Starres.
Thou knowest my lodging, get me inke and paper,
And hire Post-Horses, I will hence to night.
+BALTHAZER
I do beseech you sir, haue patience:
Your lookes are pale and wild, and do import
Some misaduenture.
+ROMEO
Tush, thou art deceiu'd,
Leaue me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no Letters to me from the Frier?
+BALTHAZER
No my good Lord.
+ROMEO
Mo matter: Get thee gone,
And hyre those Horses, Ile be with thee straight.
SD: +BALTHAZER exits
SD: Well Iuliet, I will lie with thee to night: Lets see for meanes: O mischiefe thou art swift, To enter in the thoughts of desperate men: I do remember an Appothecarie, And here abouts dwells, which late I noted In tattred weeds, with ouerwhelming browes, Culling of Simples, meager were his lookes, Sharpe miserie had worne him to the bones: And in his needie shop a Tortoyrs hung, An Allegater stuft, and other skins Of ill shap'd fishes, and about his shelues, A beggerly account of emptie boxes, Greene earthen pots, Bladders, and mustie seedes, Remnants of packthred, and old cakes of Roses Were thinly scattered, to make vp a shew. Noting this penury, to my selfe I said, An if a man did need a poyson now, Whose sale is persent death in Mantua, Here liues a Caitiffe wretch would sell it him. O this same thought did but fore-run my need, And this same needie man must sell it me. As I remember, this should be the house, Being holy day, the beggers shop is shut. What ho? Appothecarie?
SD: Enter +APPOTHECARIE.
+APPOTHECARIE
Who call's so low'd?
+ROMEO
Come hither man, I see that thou art poore,
Hold, there is fortie Duckets, let me haue
A dram of poyson, such soone speeding geare,
As will disperse it selfe through all the veines,
That the life-wearie-taker may fall dead,
And that the Trunke may be discharg'd of breath,
As violently, as hastie powder fier'd
Doth hurry from the fatall Canons wombe.
+APPOTHECARIE
Such mortall drugs I haue, but Mantuas law
Is death to any he, that vtters them.
+ROMEO
Art thou so bare and full of wretchednesse,
And fear'st to die? Famine is in thy cheekes,
Need and opression starueth in thy eyes,
Contempt and beggery hangs vpon thy backe:
The world is not thy friend, nor the worlds law:
The world affords no law to make thee rich.
Then be not poore, but breake it, and take this.
+APPOTHECARIE
My pouerty, but not my will consents.
+ROMEO
I pray thy pouerty, and not thy will.
+APPOTHECARIE
Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drinke it off, and if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
+ROMEO
There's thy Gold, / Worse poyson to mens soules,
Doing more murther in this loathsome world,
Then these poore compounds that thou maiest not sell.
I sell thee poyson, thou hast sold me none,
Farewell, buy food, and get thy selfe in flesh.
Come Cordiall, and not poyson, go with me
To Iuliets graue, for there must I vse thee.
SD: Exuent +ROMEO, +APPOTHECARIE

NS: Act 5 Scene 2

SD: Enter +FRIER JOHN to +FRIER LAWRENCE.
+FRIER JOHN
Holy Franciscan Frier, Brother, ho?
SD: Enter +FRIER LAWRENCE.
+FRIER LAWRENCE
This same should be the voice of +FRIER JOHN.
Welcome from Mantua, what sayes +ROMEO?
Or if his mind be writ, giue me his Letter.
+FRIER JOHN
Going to find a bare-foote Brother out,
One of our order to associate me,
Here in this Citie visiting the sick,
And finding him, the Searchers of the Towne
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did raigne,
Seal'd vp the doores, and would not let vs forth,
So that my speed to Mantua there was staid.
+FRIER LAWRENCE
Who bare my Letter then to +ROMEO?
+FRIER JOHN
I could not send it, here it is againe,
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearefull were they of infection.
+FRIER LAWRENCE
Vnhappie Fortune: by my Brotherhood
The Letter was not nice, but full of charge,
Of deare import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger: Frier +JOHN go hence,
Get me an Iron Crow, and bring it straight
Vnto my Cell.
+FRIER JOHN
Brother Ile go and bring it thee.
SD: +FRIER JOHN exits
+FRIER LAWRENCE
Now must I to the Monument alone,
Within this three houres will faire Iuliet wake,
Shee will beshrew me much that +ROMEO
Hath had no notice of these accidents:
But I will write againe to Mantua,
And keepe her at my Cell till +ROMEO come,
Poore liuing Coarse, clos'd in a dead mans Tombe,
SD: +FRIER LAWRENCE exits

NS: Act 5 Scene 3

SD: Enter +PARIS and his +PAGE.
+PARIS
Giue me thy Torch Boy, hence and stand aloft,
Yet put it out, for I would not be seene:
Vnder yond young Trees lay thee all along,
Holding thy eare close to the hollow ground,
So shall no foot vpon the Churchyard tread,
Being loose, vnfirme with digging vp of Graues,
But thou shalt heare it: whistle then to me,
As signall that thou hearest some thing approach,
Giue me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
+PAGE
I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the Churchyard, yet I will aduenture.
+PARIS
Sweet Flower with flowers thy Bridall bed I strew:
O woe, thy Canopie is dust and stones,
Which with sweet water nightly I will dewe,
Or wanting that, with teares destil'd by mones;
The obsequies that I for thee will keepe,
Nightly shall be, to strew thy graue, and weepe.
SD: Whistle Boy.
SD: The +PAGE giues warning, something doth approach, What cursed foot wanders this wayes to night, To crosse my obsequies, and true loues right? What with a Torch?
SD: Muffle me night a while.
SD: Enter +ROMEO, and +PETER.
+ROMEO
Giue me that Mattocke, & the wrenching Iron,
Hold take this Letter, early in the morning
See thou deliuer it to my Lord and Father,
Giue me the light; vpon thy life I charge thee,
What ere thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloofe,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death,
Is partly to behold my Ladies face:
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger,
A precious Ring: a Ring that I must vse,
In deare employment, therefore hence be gone:
But if thou iealous dost returne to prie
In what I further shall intend to do,
By heauen I will teare thee ioynt by ioynt,
And strew this hungry Churchyard with thy limbs:
The time, and my intents are sauage wilde:
More fierce and more inexorable farre,
Then emptie Tygers, or the roaring Sea.
+PETER
I will be gone sir, and not trouble you
+ROMEO
So shalt thou shew me friendship: take thou that,
Liue and be prosperous, and farewell good fellow.
+PETER
For all this same, Ile hide me here about,
His lookes I feare, and his intents I doubt.
+ROMEO
Thou detestable mawe, thou wombe of death,
Gorg'd with the dearest morsell of the earth:
Thus I enforce thy rotten Iawes to open,
And in despight, Ile cram thee with more food.
+PARIS
This is that banisht haughtie Mountague,
That murdred my Loues Cozin; with which griefe,
It is supposed the faire Creature died,
And here is come to do some villanous shame
To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.
Stop thy vnhallowed toyle, vile Mountague:
Can vengeance be pursued further then death?
Condemned vallaine, I do apprehend thee.
Obey and go with me, for thou must die,
+ROMEO
I must indeed, and therfore came I hither:
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man,
Flie hence and leaue me, thinke vpon those gone,
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee Youth,
Put not an other sin vpon my head,
By vrging me to furie. O be gone,
By heauen I loue thee better then my selfe,
For I come hither arm'd against my selfe:
Stay not, be gone, liue, and hereafter say,
A mad mans mercy bid thee run away.
+PARIS
I do defie thy commisseration,
And apprehend thee for a Fellon here.
+ROMEO
Wilt thou prouoke me? Then haue at thee Boy.
+PETER
O Lord they fight, I will go call the Watch.
+PARIS
O I am slaine, if thon be mercifull,
Open the Tombe, lay me with Iuliet.
+ROMEO
In faith I will, let me peruse this face:
Mercutius kinsman, Noble Countie +PARIS,
What said my man, when my betossed soule
Did not attend him as we rode? I thinke
He told me +PARIS should haue married Iuliet.
Said he not so? Or did I dreame it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talke of Iuliet,
To thinke it was so? O giue me thy hand,
One, writ with me in sowre misfortunes booke.
Ile burie thee in a triumphant graue.
A Graue; O no, a Lanthorne; slaughtred Youth:
For here lies Iuliet, and her beautie makes
This Vault a feasting presence full of light.
Death lie thou there, by a dead man inter'd.
How oft when men are at the point of death,
Haue they beene merrie? Which their Keepers call
A lightning before death? Oh how may I
Call this a lightning? O my Loue, my Wife,
Death that hath suckt the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet vpon thy Beautie:
Thou are not conquer'd: Beauties ensigne yet
Is Crymson in thy lips, and in thy cheekes,
And Deaths pale flag is not aduanced there.
Tybalt, ly'st thou there in thy bloudy sheet?
O what more fauour can I do to thee,
Then with that hand that cut thy youth in twaine,
To sunder his that was thy enemie?
Forgiue me Cozen. Ah deare Iuliet:
Why art thou yet so faire? I will beleeue,
Shall I beleeue, that vnsubstantiall death is amorous?
And that the leane abhorred Monster keepes
Thee here in darke to be his Paramour?
For feare of that, I still will stay with thee,
And neuer from this Pallace of dym night
Depart againe: come lie thou in my armes,
Heere's to thy health, where ere thou tumblest in.
O true Appothecarie!
Thy drugs are quicke. Thus with a kisse I die.
Depart againe; here, here will I remaine,
With Wormes that are thy Chambermaides: O here
Will I set vp my euerlasting rest:
And shake the yoke of inauspicious starres
From this world-wearied flesh: Eyes looke your last:
Armes take your last embrace: And lips, O you
The doores of breath, seale with a righteous kisse
A datelesse bargaine to ingrossing death:
Come bitter conduct, come vnsauoury guide,
Thou desperate Pilot, now at once run on
The dashing Rocks, thy Sea-sicke wearie Barke:
Heere's to my Loue. O true Appothecary:
Thy drugs are quicke. Thus with a kisse I die.
SD: Enter +FRIER LAWRENCE with Lanthorne, Crow, and Spade.
+FRIER LAWRENCE
St. Francis be my speed, how oft to night
Haue my old feet stumbled at graues? Who's there?
+PETER
Here's one, a Friend, & one that knowes you well.
+FRIER LAWRENCE
Blisse be vpon you. Tell me good my Friend
What Torch is yond that vainely lends his light
To grubs, and eyelesse Sculles? As I discerne,
It burneth in the Capels Monument.
+PETER
It doth so holy sir, / And there's my Master,
one that you loue.
+FRIER LAWRENCE
Who is it?
+PETER
Romeo.
+FRIER LAWRENCE
How long hath he bin there?
+PETER
Full halfe an houre.
+FRIER LAWRENCE
Go with me to the Vault.
+PETER
I dare not Sir.
My Master knowes not but I am gone hence,
And fearefully did menace me with death,
If I did stay to looke on his entents.
+FRIER LAWRENCE
Stay, then Ile go alone, feares comes vpon me.
O much I feare some ill vnluckie thing.
+PETER
As I did sleepe vnder this young tree here,
I dreamt my maister and another fought,
And that my Maister slew him.
+FRIER LAWRENCE
Romeo.
Alacke, alacke, what blood is this which staines
The stony entrance of this Sepulcher?
What meane these Masterlesse, and goarie Swords
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
Romeo, oh pale: who else? what Paris too?
And steept in blood? Ah what an vn knd houre
Is guiltie of this lamentable chance?
SD: The Lady stirs.
+JULIET
O comfortable Frier, where's my Lord?
I do remember well where I should be:
And there I am, where is my Romeo?
+FRIER LAWRENCE
I heare some noyse Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and vnnaturall sleepe,
A greater power then we can contradict
Hath thwarted our entents, come, come away,
Thy husband in thy bosome there lies dead:
And Paris too: come Ile dispose of thee,
Among a Sisterhood of holy Nunnes:
Stay not to question, for the watch is comming.
Come, go good Iuliet, I dare no longer stay.
+JULIET
Go get thee hence, for I will notuaway,
SD: +FRIER LAWRENCE exits
+JULIET
What's here? A cup clos'd in my true lo:es hand?
Poyson I see hath bin his timelesse end
O churle, drinke all? and left no friendly drop,
To helpe me after, I will kisse thy lips,
Happlie some poyson yet doth hang on them,
To make me die wth a restoratiue.
Thy lips are warme.
SD: Enter +PAGE and +WATCH.
+WATCH
Lead Boy, which way?
+JULIET
Yea noise? Then ile be briefe. O happy Dagger.
'Tis in thy sheath, there rust and let me die
SD: +JULIET kills herself.
+PAGE
This is the place, There where the Torch doth burne
+WATCH
The ground is bloody, / Search about the Churchyard.
Go some of you, who ere you find attach.
Pittifull sight, here lies the Countie slaine,
And Iuliett bleeding, warme and newly dead
Who here hath laine these two dayes buried.
Go tell the Prince, runne to the Capulets,
Raise vp the Mountagues, some others search,
We see the ground whereon these woes do lye,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes,
We cannot without circumstance descry.
SD: Enter +ROMEO'S man.
+WATCH
Here's +ROMEO'r man, / We found him in the Churchyard.
+CON
Hold him in safety, till the Prince come hither.
SD: Enter +FRIER JOHN, and another +WATCHMAN.
+3. WATCH
Here is a Frier that trembles, sighes, and weepes
We tooke this Mattocke and this Spade from him,
As he was comming from this Church-yard side.
+CON
A great suspition, stay the Frier too.
SD: Enter the +PRINCE.
+PRINCE
What misaduenture is so earely vp,
That calls our person from our mornings rest?
SD: Enter +CAPULET and his Wife.
+CAPULET
What should it be that they so shrike abroad?
+WIFE
O the people in the streete crie Romeo.
Some Iuliet, and some Paris, and all runne
With open outcry toward out Monument.
+PRINCE
What feare is this which startles in your eares?
+WATCH
Soueraigne, here lies the Countie Paris slaine,
And Romeo dead, and Iuliet dead before,
Warme and new kil'd.
+PRINCE
Search, / Seeke, and know how, this foule murder comes.
+WATCH
Here is a Frier, and Slaughter'd Romeos man,
With Instruments vpon them fit to open
These dead mens Tombes.
+CAPULET
O heauen! / O wife looke how our Daughter bleedes!
This Dagger hath mistaine, for loe his house
Is empty on the backe of Mountague,
And is misheathed in my Daughters bosome.
+WIFE
O me, this sight of death, is as a Bell
That warnes my old age to a Sepulcher.
SD: Enter +MOUNTAGUE.
+PRINCE
Come Mountague, for thou art early vp
To see thy Sonne and Heire, now early downe.
+MOUNTAGUE
Alas my liege, my wife is dead to night,
Griefe of my Sonnes exile hath stopt her breath:
What further woe conspires against my age?
+PRINCE
Looke: and thou shalt see.
+MOUNTAGUE
O thou vntaught, what manners in is this,
To presse before thy Father to a graue?
+PRINCE
Seale vp the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can cleare these ambiguities,
And know their spring, their head, their true descent,
And then will I be generall of your woes,
And lead you euen to death? meane time forbeare,
And let mischance be slaue to patience,
Bring forth the parties of suspition.
+FRIER LAWRENCE
I am the greatest, able to doe least,
Yet most suspected as the time and place
Doth make against me of this direfull murther:
And heere I stand both to impeach and purge
My selfe condemned, and my selfe excus'd.
+PRINCE
Then say at once, what thou dost know in this?
+FRIER LAWRENCE
I will be briefe, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo there dead, was husband to that Iuliet,
And she there dead, that's Romeos faithfull wife:
I married them; and their stolne marriage day
Was Tybalts Doomesday: whose vntimely death
Banish'd the new-made Bridegroome from this Citie:
For whom [and not for Tybalt] Iuliet pinde.
You, to remoue that siege of Greefe from her,
Betroth'd, and would haue married her perforce
To Countie Paris. Then comes she to me,
And [with wilde lookes] bid me deuise some meanes
To rid her from this second Marriage,
Or in my Cell there would she kill her selfe.
Then gaue I her [so Tutor'd by my Art]
A sleeping Potion, which so tooke effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The forme of death. Meane time, I writ to Romeo,
That he should hither come, as this dyre night,
To helpe to take her from her borrowed graue,
Being the time the Potions force should cease.
But he which bore my Letter, Frier Iohn,
Was stay'd by accident; and yesternight
Return'd my Letter backe. Then all alone,
At the prefixed houre of her waking,
Came I to take her from her Kindreds vault,
Meaning to keepe her closely at my Cell,
Till I conueniently could send to Romeo.
But when I came [some Minute ere the time
Of her awaking] heere vntimely lay
The Noble Paris, and true Romeo dead.
Shee wakes, and I intreated her come foorth,
And beare this worke of Heauen, with patience:
But then, a noyse did scarre me from the Tombe,
And she [too desperate] would not go with me,
But [as it seemes] did violence on her selfe.
All this I know, and to the Marriage
her Nurse is priuy: / And if ought in this
miscarried by my fault, / Let my old life
be sacrific'd, some houre before the time,
Vnto the rigour of seuerest Law.
+PRINCE
We still haue knowne thee for a Holy man.
Where's Romeos man? What can he say to this?
+PAGE
I brought my Master newes of Iuliets death,
And then in poste he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same Monument.
This Letter he early bid me giue his Father,
And threatned me with death, going in the Vault,
If I departed not, and left him there.
+PRINCE
Giue me the Letter, I will look on it.
Where is the Counties Page that rais'd the Watch?
Sirra, what made your Master in this place?
+PAGE
He came with flowres to strew his Ladies graue,
And bid me stand aloofe, and so I did:
Anon comes one with light to ope the Tombe,
And by and by my Maister drew on him,
And then I ran away to call the Watch.
+PRINCE
This Letter doth make good the Friers words,
Their course of Loue, the tydings of her death:
And heere he writes, that he did buy a poyson
Of a poore Pothecarie, and therewithall
Came to this Vault to dye, and lye with Iuliet.
Where be these Enemies? Capulet, Mountague,
See what a scourge is laide vpon your hate,
That Heauen finds meanes to kill your ioyes with Loue;
And I, for winking at your discords too,
Haue lost a brace of Kinsmen: All are punish'd.
+CAPULET
O Brother Mountague, giue me thy hand,
This is my Daughters ioynture, for no more
Can I demand.
+MOUNTAGUE
But I can giue thee more:
For I will raise her Statue in pure Gold,
That whiles Verona by that name is knowne,
There shall no figure at that Rate be set,
As that of True and Faithfull Iuliet.
+CAPULET
As rich shall Romeo by his Lady ly,
Poore sacrifices of our enmity.
+PRINCE
A glooming peace this morning with it brings,
The Sunne for sorrow will not shew his head;
Go hence, to haue more talke of these sad things,
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished.
For neuer was a Storie of more Wo,
Then this of Iuliet, and her Romeo.
SD: Exuent +ROMEO, +BALTHAZER, +APPOTHECARIE, +FRIER JOHN, +FRIER LAWRENCE, +PARIS, +PAGE, +PETER, +JULIET, +WATCH, +CON, +3. WATCH, +PRINCE, +CAPULET, +WIFE, +MOUNTAGUE
